---
title: "Letter to Beeckman"
date: 2024-08-28
weight: 8
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
---



<!-- I’m glad that you still remember the disagreement we had
recently. I see that you are still not satisfied with the
argument I used then, so I’ll write frankly about your reply.
But first I’ll give a brief account of the whole matter, so that
we can be clear about what we are arguing about. -->

I did not say that light instantaneously moves to the eye from the light-emitting body.

I said it instantaneously arrives at the eye from the light-emitting body.

In your letter you say that there is no difference between the two. You are wrong on both
points. 

I was so certain of this that if it were shown to be false I would admit that I knew absolutely nothing in philosophy.

You, on the other hand, maintained that light can move only in time.

You added that you had thought up an experiment to show which of us was mistaken:

In the night someone holds a torch in his hand and waves it around while watching the reflection in a mirror a quarter of a mile away. He will be able to tell whether he feels the movement in his hands before he sees it in the mirror.

You were so sure of the outcome of this experiment that you admitted that your entire philosophy would have to be
regarded as false if there was no observable time-lag between:
- the instant when the movement was felt by the hand
- the instant it was seen in the mirror. 

If such a time-lag was detected, my philosophy would be completely overturned.

The issue was not so much whether light travels instantaneously or whether it takes time to get anywhere.

Rather the issue is What will the outcome be of this experiment?

But the next day, wanting to be done with this dispute and to save you from pointless labour, I told you of another experiment—already carefully done by many attentive observers—which shows clearly that there is no time-lag between the instant the light is emitted from the luminous body and the instant it enters the eye.

<!-- [Descartes’s account of his experiment is interspersed with bits of his reason for regarding Beeckman’s as useless. The present version separates the two, but doesn’t alter the content of either.]  -->

First, there was the issue of your experiment. I asked you to settle what the smallest observable interval would be between t1 when the torch is moved and t2 when the movement appears in
the mirror a quarter of a mile away. 

The day before, you stipulated that this time-interval would have to be at least
as short as a single pulse beat; but then more liberally you
allowed that it could be as short as I liked. So, to show that I
didn’t want to take advantage of your concession, I assumed
that the interval was no longer than one-twenty-fourth of
a pulse beat; and you agreed that that interval would be
undetectable in your experiment.

But it would be perfectly detectable in mine. To explain this experiment to you, I first asked whether you thought 
•that the moon gets its light from the sun and •that eclipses
occur because the earth comes between the sun and the
moon or the moon comes between the sun and the earth.
You answered Yes to both. I then asked how you suppose

the light from ·the sun and· the stars reaches us, and you
replied ‘in straight lines’. On your view, therefore, we never
see the sun in its true position but only in the position it had
at the moment when the light we’re seeing now was emitted
from it. Let us now suppose that the distance between the
moon and the earth is fifty times the radius of the earth, and
astronomy and geometry together imply that that radius is
at least 600 miles long. Now if light takes 1
24 of the interval
of a pulse beat to cross a quarter of a mile twice, it will take
an interval of 5,000 pulse beats, i.e at least one hour, to
cross the space between the moon and the earth twice, as is
obvious when you work it out.
I’m arguing here on the basis of the points that you
conceded. [Descartes’s description of the ‘experiment’ is
needlessly hard to follow, but it’s basic point is simple. Let
T be a time at which we on earth see the moon starting to
undergo an eclipse; we may think that the sun, earth and
moon are coming to be on a straight line at that time, but
according to Beeckman’s thesis that light travels at a velocity
not greater than 12 miles per pulse-beat they aren’t. The
start of the eclipse as we see it represents where the sun was
an hour earlier, when its position relative to the earth was
different (Descartes is careful to say that it doesn’t matter
whether it’s the sun or the earth that is moving!) Descartes
continues:] The careful and painstaking observations of
every astronomer testify, and countless experiments confirm,
that when the moon is seen from earth to be undergoing an
eclipse, the sun and earth and moon are in a straight line.
This shows that light takes no detectable time to travel a vast
distance, whereas your experiment doesn’t show anything
either way. I claimed that this argument is conclusive; you
called it fallacious and question-begging.