---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


20. Here I do not individually explain what gives the soul the opportunity to conceive all the differences in color, as I have already discussed them abundantly before. Nor do I describe at length here what objects pleasantly affect sight and what offend it. For it is not difficult to perceive, from what is known about other senses, that overly intense light can harm vision, while moderate light can refresh it, especially the color green, which consists of the proportion of one to two and is related to the octave in musical consonances, and daily bread compared to other types of food, which generally bring more pleasure. And finally, all those different colors, which novelty endears and often provide greater delight to the sight than the color green, are like excellent and unusual musical modulations or the delicate food of a wise cook. Indeed, they initially stimulate the senses like a pleasant itch, but they quickly cause weariness and nausea much faster than simple and ordinary objects. The only thing left to explain is what it is that shows the soul the ability to perceive the position, shape, distance, size, and other similar qualities, which are not perceived by only one sense, such as those discussed so far, but are common to touch, taste, and even other senses. Therefore, note first that when, for example, hand A touches object C, the parts of the brain B, from which the filaments of those nerves originate, are arranged differently than if it were touching something else, whether in shape, size, or location. And therefore, the soul can perceive the position, shape, size, and similar qualities of the object in a peculiar way through the manner in which it is affected.


Similarly, if the eye D looks at the object E, the soul will be able to perceive the position of that object because the nerves of that eye will be arranged differently than if it were looking elsewhere. And it will recognize its shape because the rays from point 1 converging at point 2, to the nerve called optic, and the rays from point 3 at point 4, and so on for the others, will paint a figure exactly similar to its own figure. It will also be able to perceive the distance of point 1 because the arrangement of the crystalline humor will be different for the other figure, so that all rays coming from this point will precisely converge at point 2 on the fundus of the eye, which, as previously stated, I assume to be the medium between distant and near. Moreover, the soul will be able to perceive the shapes of point 3 and at the same time of all the others from which rays will enter the eye simultaneously because with the crystalline humor arranged in that way, the rays from point 3 will not converge as precisely at point 4 as those coming from point 1 do at point 2. Let the judgment be the same for the others. But it does not preserve the same proportion as to the forces acting, as at other times. Finally, the soul can perceive the size of objects affecting sight, and other similar qualities, solely by the knowledge it has of the distance and position of all the points that make them up. Likewise, it will judge the distance of those points solely by the opinion it forms of their size.

