---
title: ""
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


33. In order to conceive those motions similar to those by which we are naturally incited by the various actions of objects affecting our senses, I want you to consider with me six different types of circumstances on which they depend. The first is the location from which the action originates, which opens certain tubes into which the spirits first enter. The second consists of the efficacy and other qualities of that action. The third lies in the disposition of the filaments composing the substance of the brain. The fourth concerns the inequality of strength and efficacy that spirit particles can possess. The fifth involves the different positions of external members. And the sixth relates to the convergence of multiple actions that simultaneously affect the sense. As for the location from which the action proceeds, it is already abundantly clear that if, for example, object A, B, C acted on a sense other than sight, it would open different tubes in the inner surface of the brain than those noted as 2, 4, 6. However, if the object were closer or farther away, or in a different position with respect to the eye than it currently is, it could indeed open the same tubes but they would be arranged differently than they are at present, and therefore the spirits would be directed to different locations than to a, b, c, where they are currently directed. And so on for the rest. As for the diversity of qualities of the actions that open those tubes, it is also clear that they would open them differently according to their diversity. And it should be considered that this difference alone is sufficient to alter the course of the spirits in the brain.


For example, if object A, B, C, is red, that is, if it acts on the eye 1, 3, 5, as is required for the sensation of the red color (as also stated above), and if that object further has the shape of an apple or another fruit: it must be considered that it will open the tubes 2, 4, 6 in a certain way. This will cause the brain particles near N to press slightly more than usual against each other, while those near O will move away from each other, so that the spirits entering through those tubes 2, 4, 6 are directed from N through O towards P. And if the object A, B, C were of a different color and shape, precisely those filaments around N and O would not be the cause of the direction of the spirits entering through 2, 4, 6, but other nearby filaments would divert them elsewhere. However, if the heat of fire A, which is close to hand B, were moderate, it must be considered that the way it opens the tubes 7 is the reason why the parts of the brain around N are pressed, while those around O are slightly more dilated than usual. Thus, the spirits proceeding from tube 7 would tend from O to P. But assuming that the fire burns the hand: it must be considered that its action opens the tubes 7 so much that the spirits flowing into it have the force to tend further in a straight line than up to N, indeed up to r, where the pushing brain particles encountered in their transit press them in such a way that they are repelled through them towards S. And so on for the others. As for the disposition of the filaments composing the substance of the brain: it is either acquired or natural. And since the acquired one depends on all other circumstances that alter the course of the spirits, I will explain it more conveniently later.

