---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


30. From the marked figure M, it is evident how the spirits, flowing out from gland H, after they have dilated the part of the brain marked A and all pores being opened, withdraw from there to B, then to C, and finally towards D, from where they spread into all the nerves. And in this way, all the filaments from which the nerves and brain are composed are so closely connected that even actions of very slight force in moving are easily communicated from one end to the other; and the obliquity of the paths they traverse is by no means an impediment. But so that these windings of the paths may not hinder you from clearly perceiving how that obliquity serves the formation of the ideas of objects which strike the senses, cast your eyes on this figure. See in the following figure the filaments 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 (Figure XXXIV), and the like, which compose the optic nerves, and are expanded from the bottom of the eye 1, 3, 5, to the inner surface of the brain 2, 4, 6. And consider that these filaments are so arranged that if rays drawn, for example, from point A, press on the bottom of the eye at point i, they will in that manner draw the entire filament 1, 2 and extend and open more the tube marked number 2. In exactly the same way, rays incident on point 3 open the tube 4. Let the same judgment apply to the others, so that just as the different ways in which points 1, 3, 5 are pressed by these rays impress on the bottom of the eye a shape corresponding to object A, B, C, as stated above. So it is evident that the various ways in which the tubes 2, 4, 6 are open should also imprint their trace on the inner surface of the brain through filaments 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.


31. Then consider the spirits which try to enter each of the tubes 2, 4, 6, and similar ones, not to come out indifferently from all points that are on the surface of gland H, but only from certain ones individually: and those, for example, which come out from point A, strive to enter tubes 4 and 6, and so on for the others. As soon as the openings of those tubes become larger, the spirits from the surface of this gland begin to exit more freely and quickly than before, looking towards those points on the tubes. And just as the different ways in which the tubes 2, 4, 6 are open impress a shape on the inner surface of the brain similar to the object ABC, so also those modes or determinations which arise from spirits flowing from points ABC imprint the same shape on the surface of the gland. It should be noted, however, that by the term "shape" in this place I understand not only those things which represent the determinations of lines and the surfaces of objects in a certain way, but also all those things which in the manner mentioned above can give occasion to the soul to perceive motion, distance, magnitude, colors, sounds, smells, and other similar qualities. Indeed, even those by which the soul may perceive tickling, pain, hunger, joy, sadness, or other similar passions. For it is easy to understand that a tube, for example, may be opened in a different way by an action other than the one I mentioned, to excite the sensation of red color or the sensation of tickling, than to induce the sensation of white color or that of pain, as I have asserted. And the spirits flowing from point A tend to enter this tube in different ways depending on how it has been opened, and so on for the others. But these shapes are not to be counted among those which are inscribed on the organs of external senses or on the inner surface of the brain. Only those are to be considered, which the spirits are affected by on the surface of gland H, where the seat of imagination and common sense is. These are to be taken as ideas, that is, as forms or images which the rational soul will consider immediately after this machine is united, when it imagines or feels some object.