---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


19. Convexity, which affects the marked part BCB of the first tunic, and refraction, which occurs therein, is the reason why rays coming from objects looking at that part of the eye can enter through the pupil, so that the soul with an unmoving eye can perceive a greater number of objects than if the eye were not convex in that part. For example: If the ray PBKQ were not refracted at point B, it could not pass through points FF, and through them to the optic nerve. But refraction, which occurs in the crystalline humor, strengthens and clarifies vision. It must be understood that the structure of that humor is composed in such a way that it corresponds exactly to the refractions that occur in other parts of the eye, and to the distances of the objects. 

Hence, in direct vision to a certain point, all rays emanating from that point are accurately collected in a certain point of the retina or optic nerve of the eye. And by the same reasoning, it prevents any rays coming from elsewhere from falling on that part of the nerve. For example, with the crystalline humor so arranged as to look at point R, the rays RN S and RL S etc. are accurately gathered at point S. Similarly, this arrangement of the crystalline humor prevents rays coming from points T, X, etc. from reaching it. For it collects all the rays of point T around point V and all the rays of point X around point Y. The same reasoning applies to the others. 

But if there were no refraction in the eye, the object R would affect only one of its rays at point S, with the rest scattered throughout the space V and Y. Similarly, points T and X, and all other intermediate points, would only send one of their rays to point S. From which it is most evident that object R can act more strongly on the part of the nerve that is at point S, by sending a large number of rays to it, than if it only affected it with a single ray: and that part of the nerve S will convey the action of that object R more distinctly and faithfully to the brain, since it receives rays from it alone, than if it received them from many. 

The black color of both the concave surface of the membrane EF and of the filaments EN also renders vision more distinct. For, as is evident from the above about the nature of this color, it dulls, darkens, and prevents the power of the rays reflected from the back of the eye to the front, thus preventing them from causing confusion of rays there. For example, the rays of object X tending to point Y in the whitish nerve are reflected from there to N and F in all directions; from where they could be reflected to S and V; and thereby disturb the actions of R and T, if bodies N and F were not black. However, the change that occurs in the crystalline humor causes the images of more distant or nearer objects to be more distinctly painted on the back of the eye. For, as it was said in the second book (Dioptrics): If, for example, the humor LN is of such a figure that it can precisely direct all the rays of point R to point S, it cannot, with the same unchanged figure, cause the rays of point T, which is nearer, or of point X, which is more distant, to impinge on it: But it will be the cause that the ray Tl. tends to K; and Tn to G. And conversely, that Xl tends towards G; And Xn to K. And so on for the others. So to represent the point distinctly, it is necessary to change the entire figure of the humor LN slightly and make it flatter or more obtuse. But the change in size that occurs in the pupil moderates the powers of vision. For when the light is more intense, it decreases; so that the nerve is not offended by an excessive number of rays entering the eyes. But when the light is weaker, it dilates so that sufficient rays enter to stimulate the senses. Moreover, if the light remains constant, the pupil must become larger when the object being viewed is more distant than when it is closer. For example, if more rays of point R do not enter through the pupil of eye 7 than are required for perception, it is necessary for so many rays to enter the eye 8, and hence the pupil must be larger.

The smallness of the pupil also renders vision more distinct. It must be understood that no matter what shape the crystalline humor may have, it is not possible for rays emanating from different points of the object to all be accurately collected in different points; but as soon as, for example, the rays of point R are accurately gathered at point S, none will be from point T except those that pass through the circumference and center of a circle that can be described on the surface of the crystalline humor, which can be perfectly collected at point V. And consequently, others, which are in a much smaller number, as the pupil is smaller, touching other points of the nerve, cannot but cause confusion. Hence, if the vision of the same eye is currently weaker than before, objects will also be less distinctly perceived; whether this arises from the distance of the object or from the weakness of the light. Therefore, it happens that the soul can perceive only one single point distinctly in each vision; namely, that to which the whole eye turns. And therefore, other things will appear to it more confused, the farther they are from this. For if, for example, all the rays of point R are accurately gathered at point S, the rays of point X will be less accurately collected at point Y than the rays of point T at point V. And the same judgment holds for the others, namely, in proportion to their distance from point R. However, the muscles O O, turning the eyes in all directions very readily, compensate for this deficiency; namely, by applying them successively to all points of the object in the smallest possible time, so that the soul sees one thing after another, yet all very distinctly.