---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


27. Therefore, the juice of foods, which passes through the stomach into the veins, mingling with the blood, always imparts certain of its qualities to it; and, to omit other considerations, when it is freshly mixed with it, it usually renders it somewhat thicker; so that at that time the finer particles of blood, which the blood sends to the brain to become animal spirits there, are not usually as much agitated, nor as efficacious, nor as abundant; and consequently, they do not impart as much vigor and lightness to the body of this machine as they do later: namely, after complete digestion, when the blood has acquired greater subtlety through repeated passage through the heart. Moreover, the air that is inspired, also mingling with the blood in a certain manner before it enters the left ventricle of the heart, causes it to be more strongly ignited there; and there it produces spirits that are more lively and more agitated in dry weather than in humid weather. Just as it is also evident that flames of any kind flare up more violently at that time. Furthermore, when the liver is well disposed and labors perfectly to pour the blood into the heart, the spirits that are excreted from that blood are far more copious and evenly agitated. But when the liver is pressed by its nerves, the finer parts of the blood that it contains, ascending suddenly to the heart, will also generate spirits more copious and lively than usual, yet less evenly agitated. If, however, bile, which is naturally meant to purge the blood, fails in its duty to inflame the remaining mass of blood in the heart from those parts that are more apt to be inflamed, or if it is constricted by its nerve or another part of the body, the matter it contains will be poured back into the veins; and the spirits will be all the more lively or agile, yet at the same time more unevenly agitated. But if, on the contrary, the spleen, whose function is to purify the blood from those parts that are less likely to be inflamed in the heart, is ill disposed, or if it is constricted or pressed by its nerve or another part of the body, the matter it contains will be regurgitated into the veins; and the spirits will be less copious, less agitated, and more unevenly driven. Finally, all those things that can bring about some change in the blood can also change the spirits; but especially the little nerve that terminates in the heart, since it can expand and contract, can impart a thousand differentiations to the spirits, both to the two entrances through which the blood of the veins and the air from the lungs descend, and also to those through which the blood exhales into the arteries. No differently than the heat of certain lamps used in chemistry can be varied in various ways, depending on whether the opening through which the oil or other fuel of the flame should be received is more or less open, or whether the one through which the smoke escapes is more or less open.

28. As for the pores of the brain, we should not imagine them otherwise than as a kind of intervals that can be observed between the threads of linen. For the whole brain is nothing but a texture arranged in a peculiar manner, which I will attempt to explain here.
