---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


25. Now if you wish, conceive the heart and arteries which drive the animal spirits into the hollows of our brain's machine, to be like the bellows of an organ, which impel air into its wind chambers. But external objects, which, insofar as they move the nerves, cause the spirits of those hollows to enter through certain pores of some of them, you will not inappropriately compare to the organist's fingers, which, according to the various motions with which they depress the keys, cause air to burst forth from the wind chambers into certain tubes. Just as the harmony of organs does not depend on the disposition of the tubes by which it is excited, which appears externally, nor even on the shape of the wind chambers or other parts, but only on three causes. Namely, from the air which is breathed out of the bellows, from the tubes which produce sound, and from the distribution of that air into those tubes. Similarly, the functions about which we are speaking here depend in no way on the external figure of all visible parts, which anatomists distinguish in the substance of the brain, nor even on the shape of its hollows, but only on the spirits which flow from the heart, the pores of the brain through which they pass, and the manner in which those spirits are distributed into those pores. So that it is necessary to explain only what is most worthy of note in these three.

26. First, as far as the animal spirits are concerned, they can exist at different times, in greater or lesser abundance: and their parts may be more or less dense, more or less agitated, or more or less unequal among themselves. And by reason of these differences, all diverse temperaments and natural affections by which we are affected, at least to the extent that they do not depend on the constitution of the brain or the peculiar affections of the soul, are represented in this machine. For if these spirits exist in greater abundance than usual, they will have the capacity to excite movements in that machine plainly similar to those which testify to goodness, generosity, and love in us: and similar to those which indicate that we are endowed with confidence and boldness, if indeed their parts are stronger and denser. Promptness, diligence, and desire, if they are more agitated. And tranquility of mind, if they are equally moved. Conversely, they manifest malignity, timidity, inconstancy, negligence, and restlessness if they lack these qualities. Moreover, it should be understood that all other temperaments, or natural inclinations, are composed of or depend on these already mentioned. For instance, a cheerful temperament is composed of promptness and tranquility of mind; but goodness and confidence make that temperament more perfect. A sad temperament consists of slowness and restlessness, which malice and fear can intensify. A choleric temperament is formed by promptness and restlessness, which malignancy and confidence strengthen. And the same goes for the others. However, since those temperaments, or at least the passions to which they incline, also depend greatly on the impressions with which the substance of the brain is affected, which you will understand better later, it will suffice here to enumerate the causes of the differences in spirits.