---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---



14. The filaments that make up the nerve center of the tongue and serve the organs of taste can be more easily moved than those that assist in general touch. This is because they are slightly more pliable and because the membranes that envelop them are thinner. Consider, for example, that these filaments can be moved in four different ways by particles of salt, acidic water, plain water, and the water of life, all of whose quantities and shapes I have explained to you. Therefore, they can create four entirely different tastes for the soul to perceive. For instance, the rigid particles of salt, when agitated and separated from each other by the movement of saliva, enter the pores of the tongue punctually and without flexing. Conversely, the particles of acidic water flow obliquely into the same pores, striking them with very fine particles, which, however, are deflected when they encounter thicker ones. Those composed of plain water, on the other hand, do not enter any parts of the tongue or penetrate deeply into its pores; they merely moisten it. Finally, the particles of the water of life penetrate the deepest and are agitated with the swiftest motion. From this, it is evident how the soul perceives the various species of taste, considering the various ways in which particles of terrestrial bodies can act on the tongue. However, it is especially noteworthy that the same particles of food that, when present in the mouth, can enter the pores of the tongue and thereby stimulate the sense of taste, are the ones that, when present in the stomach, can pass into the blood and eventually be assimilated by the other organs. Thus, only those that gently titillate the tongue and thereby provide a pleasant taste sensation to the soul are suitable for this effect. As for those that act too much or too little upon it, they cannot evoke taste unless they are either too sharp or too weak, and they are either too penetrating or too soft to be able to compose the blood and nourish certain organs. However, those particles of food that are so coarse or so closely united that they cannot be separated or diluted by the movement of saliva and thus cannot enter the pores of the tongue, cannot act on those nerves that serve taste; they only act on the nerves that exercise the sense of touch in general. Similarly, those that lack pores, as they cannot cause the soul to perceive any taste, are also generally inept when they are sent into the stomach. This is so universally true that often, as the temperament changes, the effectiveness of taste is also diminished, to the extent that food that was pleasing to the soul may seem tasteless and bitter to it at other times. The reason for this is that saliva, coming from the stomach and imbued with the qualities of the humor with which the stomach abounds, mixes with the particles of food in the mouth and greatly promotes their action.



15. The sense of smell is also created by numerous filaments emanating from the base of the brain to the nose. These filaments do not differ in any way from the nerves of touch or taste, except that they do not extend beyond the skull, which contains the brain. However, these filaments can be moved by particles much finer than those affecting the nerves of the tongue, both because they are thinner and because they are more immediately affected by objects. When this machine breathes, the finer particles of air drawn into the nostrils penetrate the pores of the sieve-like bone, if not into the very concavities of the brain, at least into the space between the two membranes in which the brain is enveloped. Hence, they find a way to reach the palate, simultaneously. Similarly, in a reciprocal flow, when air is expelled from the chest by breathing out, it returns through the palate to that space, and then passes again through the nostrils. Indeed, at the opening of this space, they encounter the ends of the said filaments, either entirely bare or clothed only with a very thin membrane, which is therefore easily moved. Moreover, the structure of these openings is such, and their narrowness so great, that the passage of all terrestrial particles, including those coarser ones mentioned earlier as odors, is barred from reaching these filaments, except perhaps for certain ones of the same nature as those from which the water of life is composed, which, having obtained their shape, penetrate deeply. Finally, those very minute terrestrial particles, which are always more abundant in the air than in other mixed bodies, those alone slightly thicker or thinner than others, or more or less mobile due to their shape, will provide the soul with the opportunity to perceive different odors. Indeed, when these excesses are very moderate and well-balanced among themselves, they will produce pleasant odors. Those that act only in ordinary circumstances cannot be perceived by smell at all, and those that are excited with too much force or are moved too gently cannot help but be displeasing.



16. However, the filaments that make up the organs of hearing are not necessarily as thin as those preceding them; it is sufficient if they are arranged in the inner concavity of the ears in such a way that they are easily and uniformly moved by those tremulous motions, by which the external air, passing through the thin membrane stretched over the openings of these concavities, is moved; and they can be affected by no other object than by the air alone, which presses upon this membrane. For these tremulous impulses, reaching all the way to the brain through the nerves, provide the soul with the opportunity to conceive the idea of sounds. Of these, it should be particularly noted that only one will present to the hearing nothing but an indistinct murmur that will perish in a moment, in which only the variation in size and smallness can be perceived, depending on whether the ear has been more or less stimulated. But when several impulses follow one another, as is evident to sight whenever strings or trembling bells produce a sound, the more or less equality of these impulses will determine a sound that will seem sweeter or harsher to the soul, or even higher or lower; depending on whether they follow each other more or less promptly: So that, if by half or a third or a quarter or a fifth part, etc., one follows the other more promptly at one time than another, they will produce a sound which the soul will judge to be higher by an octave, or a fifth, or a fourth, or a major third, etc. And finally, several tones together will agree or disagree, depending on whether the similarity or proportion is greater or lesser, or whether the intervals between the impulses are more or less equal. For example, if the divisions A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H represent small impulses composing various sounds, we shall easily judge that those represented by the lines G and H will not be as pleasing to our ears as others. Just as the roughness of a stone is less pleasing to the touch than the smoothness of a polished mirror. And it should be noted that B represents a sound higher by an octave than A, C represents a fifth; D, a fourth; E, a major third; and F, an even higher sound. And it should be observed that A and B, or A B C, or A B D, or A B E, or even A B C E, harmonize better than A and F, or A G D, or A D E, etc.



