---
title: "Treatise on Man Simplified"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---





Those tiny tubes, by slightly inflating, act to prevent excessive compression of the filaments there and, at the same time, to enable them to extend from the brain, where they originate, to the places where they terminate. Therefore, after God has united the soul, capable of reason, to this machine, as I will show later, He will assign the brain as its principal seat. Its nature is such that, depending on the various ways in which the openings of the pores in the inner surface of the brain, traversed by nerves, are opened, it will also have various senses. First, if the small filaments composing the marrow of these nerves are pulled with such force that they break and are torn from the limb to which they were attached, thereby corrupting the structure of the entire machine to some extent, the soul, whose interest it is to preserve its protected seat, will conceive the cause of feeling pain from the motion excited in the brain by that force. But if those filaments are pulled with almost equal force, yet without breaking or being torn from the limbs to which they adhere, they will produce a motion in the brain, which, providing evidence of the good constitution of the other members, will give the soul a certain bodily pleasure, which we call titillation. This sensation, while coming as close as possible to pain in terms of cause, produces an effect completely contrary to it. If several such filaments are pulled together equally, the soul will perceive the surface of the body that the limb in which they terminate touches to be smooth and polished. But if they are pulled unevenly and are felt, they will indicate a rough surface. And if the filaments are not pulled together but one after another separately, as is always the case with heat, which is imparted to the heart before the other members, the soul will perceive no sensation at all, nor will it be affected more than by its customary actions. Moreover, if this motion from an external cause is slightly intensified or diminished, an increase in heat will indeed exhibit the sensation of heat to the soul, while a decrease in cold will exhibit the sensation of cold. Finally, according to the various ways in which the filaments of the nerves are affected, the soul will perceive any qualities relating to touch in general, such as humidity, dryness, hardness, weight, and the like. It should only be noted here that although these filaments are very thin and thus easily moved, they are not so delicate as to be able to attribute to the brain any slightest movements whatsoever, but rather the slightest movements affecting the brain are those caused by the coarser particles of terrestrial bodies. Indeed, some particles of this kind, although sufficiently coarse, nevertheless affect these filaments so gently that they either press them or immediately sever them, yet their action does not reach the brain. Just as certain drugs have the power to induce numbness, even to corrupt the actions of our members to which they are applied, and therefore to intercept all sensation.