---
title: "Ideas and Memory"
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---

Also note, in Figure XXIII, if these two hands F and G grasp different ends of the stick H and I, with which they touch the object K, although the soul may not know the length of these sticks in any other way, yet knowing the distance between the two points F and G, and the magnitude of the angles FGH and GFI, it can be more certain, as if by some natural geometry, where the object K is. Similarly, if both eyes L and M directly look at the object N, the length of the line LM, and at the same time the angles LMN and MLN, in Figure XXIV, will show the soul where the point N is. However, in all these cases, the soul can often be deceived. First, if the position of the fingers or the eyes is distorted against nature by an external cause, the brain particles, from which the nerves originate, will not respond as accurately as they would if they depended only on naturally acting muscles; thus, the soul, which feels only through the intervention of those brain particles, may then be deceived as shown in Figure XXV.



For example, if the hand F, when placed by itself to turn towards O, is distorted by some external force towards K, the parts of the brain from which these nerves originate will not be arranged in the same way as if the hand were turned towards K by spontaneous muscle movement, nor even in the same way as if it were truly directed towards O. But rather in a manner between those two, namely in the same way as if it were turned towards P. Hence the soul will take the opportunity, as depicted in Figure XXVI, to judge that the object K is at point P and is different from what the hand G touched. Similarly, if the eye M is twisted away from the object N by force and placed as if it were looking towards Q, the soul will judge it to be directed towards R. And because with the eye so positioned, the rays of the object N incident into the eye just as they would if coming from point S, if the eye were truly turned towards R, it will judge the object N to be at point S, and therefore different from what is seen by the eye M. Likewise, the two fingers T and R, touching the sphere X, will give the soul the opportunity, as shown in Figure XXVII, to think that two different bodies are being touched because the crossed fingers are held against their natural position. Furthermore, if rays or any other lines, due to the action of any distant objects, are curved when they reach the senses, the soul, which commonly assumes them to be straight, will take the opportunity to deceive itself.

Just as, if the stick H is bent towards K, the object K that it touches will appear to the soul towards R. Figure XXIX. If indeed the eye L receives the rays of the object N through the glass 3, which refracts or bends them, that object will appear to the soul to be at point A. Figure XXX. Similarly, if the eye B receives the rays of the point D through the glass C, which I suppose are all refracted or bent in the same way, as if they were coming from point E, and as if those from point F were coming from point G; and so on with the others: the object DFH will appear to the soul with the same magnitude and distance as the object EGI is seen. To conclude, it must be noted: all the methods by which the soul endeavors to discern the distance of objects by sight are doubtful and uncertain. For as for the angles LMN and MLN, and those similar to them, they hardly change sensibly anymore when the object is farther away than 15 or 20 feet. See above Fig. XXIV. And as for the disposition of the crystalline humor, it also changes less sensibly as soon as the object is more than three or four feet away from the eye. Finally, the judgment regarding distance, which we form either by opinion based on the size of the objects we conceive, or from the fact that the rays emanating from their different points do not unite so accurately on the fundus of the eye, shows how easily we can be deceived by arguments based on perspective. For whenever figures are painted smaller in perspective than we imagine they should be, and with darker colors and more confused lines, they always appear more distant and larger than they really are.