---
title: ""
linkTitle: Man
# date: 2022-01-29
weight: 5
description: "Renatus Cartesius 31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650 was a French philosopher, mathematician, and scientist who invented analytic geometry"
image: "/covers/man.jpg"
draft: true
---


But the chief effect that arises from these things consists in this: that the spirits thus emanating, notably from certain particular parts of the surface of the gland, rather than from others, have the efficacy to cause the interior surface of the brain's tubes into which they are received, to turn towards the places from which they emanate; unless perhaps they find them all turned in that direction: and by this means causing the members to which those tubes are attached to move to those places to which the parts of surface H refer. It should also be noted that the idea of the motion of the members consists only in the manner in which the spirits leap from that gland: and thus the motion itself is formed from its idea. For example, we may suppose here that the reason why tube 8 turns more towards point b than elsewhere is only that the spirits emanating from this point tend with greater force towards it than others. And this itself affords the soul an opportunity to feel the arm turning towards B, if the arm of the machine is so arranged, as I now suppose. For we must consider that all the points to which those tubes can be turned correspond in such a way to all the places to which the arm, noted 7, can be moved, that the arm is turned towards object B for no other reason than that its tube looks at point b. But if the spirits, changing their course, were to turn their tube to some other point, say to c, the filaments 7, arising around it, would expand or contract their position in the same way, dilating some brain pores situated around d, and others, so that the spirits from them would turn the arm towards object C differently than at present, immediately upon the track, so to speak, the arm towards object C. As conversely, if some other action, other than that of the spirits entering through tube 8, were to turn the same arm towards B or towards C, causing those tubes 8 or d to turn towards b or c: and thus the idea of that motion would also be formed; at least if attention were not distracted, that is, if gland H were not hindered from inclining towards 8 by some stronger action. And thus in general it must be considered that any other tube situated on the inner surface of the brain refers to each of the other members; and each of the other points on the surface of gland H, to any place to which those members can be turned. So the motion of the members, and their ideas mutually and reciprocally cause nothing to oppose. Moreover, on this occasion, we understand why, when both the eye machine and the organs of various other senses are turned to the same object, multiple ideas are not formed in its brain, but only one. It must always be considered that the same points of this surface of gland H, from which the spirits emanate, which, tending to various tubes, can cause different members to be turned to different objects: As here, for example, spirits emanate from the point b alone, which, tending to tubes 4 and 8, at the same time turn both eyes and the right arm towards object B: which is not difficult to believe. Moreover, to understand in what idea the distance of the object consists; it must be considered how much the surface changes its position, those same points refer to places so much more distant from the center of the brain, noted O, the closer they are, and the closer, the Figure XL. They are more distant. As here, for example, if point B had moved back a little, it would refer to a more remote place than B. But if it were a little more inclined towards the anterior part, it would refer to a closer place: hence if the machine's soul is present, so that it can sometimes perceive different objects, with the same organs, arranged in the same way, although nothing is changed except the position of gland H. As here, for example, the soul may perceive what is at point l, by holding two sticks N L and O L with two hands. Since spirits emanate from point l of gland H, tending to 7 and 8, to which those two hands respond. But if this gland H were still closer, so that points n and o were in places marked I, K, and consequently spirits had emanated from them, tending to 7 and 8, the soul should perceive what is at N and O, by the same hands, also not changed at all. It must be noted, however, that when gland H is inclined towards some part solely by the force of the spirits, the rational soul and external senses contribute nothing to the production of ideas formed on the surface of the gland, ideas arise not only from the inequalities of the spirits, which consist of the particular ones mutually encountering each other, as has been said above, but also from traces of memory. For if the distinctive figure of a particular object is impressed on a part of the brain more distinctly than any other, to which the gland accurately inclines, the spirits tending towards it cannot fail to receive the impression: and for this reason things past sometimes return to thought merely by chance, although memory is not much excited by any object that strikes the senses. But if, as often happens, more and different figures are found almost equally perfectly impressed on the same part of the brain, the spirits will receive something from the impression of each, more or less, as their particles come upon them differently. And thus in this way chimeras and hippogriffs are composed in their imagination, who dream while awake, that is, who allow their imagination, not diverted by any external objects, governed by no reason, but let loose through laziness. But the effect of memory, whose examination is here of greater utility, consists in this, that this machine, even though no soul exists in it, can nevertheless be naturally arranged so that it can imitate the motions of true men, or other similar things that are present to it. Another cause that can determine the motion of gland H is the action of objects on the senses that occur.