---
title: "How Does Light Move Air Particles?"
heading: Articles 28-31
weight: 10
description: "This Earth we inhabit was once formed solely from the fire-aether, like the Sun, although much smaller"
writer:
  name: Rene Descartes
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes
image: "/covers/philos.png"
icon: "/icons/descartes.png"
---


### 28. How Does Light Move Air Particles?

The force of the light from the Sun and stars spread to all parts of the sky.

The sun's rays interact with the particles of Earth in various ways.

These rays exert a certain straight-line pressure from the Sun to the Earth.

This pressure is not applied uniformly to all particles of the Earth-aether in the upper region of the Earth.

<!-- , but now to one, now to another, and even at times to one extremity of the same particle and then to another, it can be easily understood how  -->

This creates various motions in these particles. 

For example, if `AB` is an Earth-element particle in the upper region of the Earth, leaning towards another particle `C`, and with many other particles like `D, E, F` interspersed between them. 

These intervening particles may hinder the Sun's rays `G`, `G` from pressing on the extremity `B` but not on `A`. 

Thus, the extremity `A` will be depressed, and `B` will be raised.

These particles constantly change their positions. Shortly afterwards, they will be opposed to the Sun's rays tending toward `A`, but not to those tending toward `B`.

Consequently, the extremity `A` will rise again, and `B` will be depressed. The same happens with all Earth particles reached by the Sun's light, and hence, all are moved by the light.


### 29. Regarding the fourth, which is heat, what it is, and how it persists after light is removed.

This agitation of terrestrial particles, whether originating from light or any other cause, is called heat, especially when it is greater than usual and affects the senses. 

The designation of heat is related to the sense of touch. It should be noted that each of these terrestrial particles, once set in motion, persists in its motion according to the laws of nature until it is stopped by some other cause. 

Therefore, heat originating from light continues to exist for some time after the light is removed.


### 30. Why heat penetrates deeper than light.

The earth-aether particles, impelled by the Sun's rays, agitate others nearby to which these rays do not reach.  These, in turn, agitate others, and so on. 

Since the entire half of the Earth is always illuminated by the Sun, so many of these particles are set in motion that, although light remains on the first opaque surface, heat generated by it must penetrate to the innermost parts of the middle region of the Earth.


### 31. Why it rarefies almost all bodies.

These terrestrial particles, when agitated by more than usual heat, cannot be contained in the usual narrow space, as when they are at rest or less in motion.

This is because they have irregular shapes, occupying less space when connected in a certain way and at rest than when they are continually moving and separating. Thus, heat rarefies almost all terrestrial bodies, but to varying degrees depending on the arrangement and shape of the particles they consist of.
