---
heading: "Chapters 1-2"
title: "The Source of feudal Laws"
weight: 4
description: "Commerce was transferred to Jews who were covered with infamy."
image: "/covers/spirit.jpg"
contributors: ['Montesquieu']
icon: /icons/mont.png
draft: true
---


The feudal laws form a very beautiful prospect.

THE conquerors of the Roman empire came from Germany.

Though few ancient authors have described their manners, yet = we have two of very great weight. C=C3=A6sar making war against the Germans= , describes the manners= =E2=80=A0 of that nation; and upon these he regulated=E2=80=A1 some of his enterprises. A f= ew pages of C=C3=A6sar upon this subject are equal to whole volumes.

Tacitus has written an entire work on th= e manners of the Germans. This work is short, but it comes from the pen of = Tacitus, who was always concise, because he saw every thing at one glance.<= /p> Edition: current; Page: [361]

These two authors agree so perfectly wit= h the codes still extant of the laws of the barbarians, that reading C=C3= =A6sar and Tacitus, we imagine we are perusing these codes, and perusing th= ese codes, we fancy we are reading C=C3=A6sar and Tacitus.

But if in this research into the feudal = laws, I should find myself entangled and lost in a dark labyrinth, I fancy = I have the clue in my hand, and that I shall be able to find my way through


CHAP. III.: The Origin of Vassalage.
C=C3=86SAR* says, =E2=80=9CThat the Germans neglected agricult= ure; that the greatest part of them lived upon milk, cheese, and flesh; tha= t no one had lands or boundaries of his own; that the princes and magistrat= es of each nation allotted what portion of land they pleased, to individual= s, and obliged them the year following to remove to some other part.=E2=80= =9D Tacitus says,=E2=80=A0= =E2=80=9CThat each prince had a multitude of men, who were attached to= his service, and followed him wherever he went.=E2=80=9D This author gives= them a name in his language relative to their state, which is that of companions.=E2=80=A1 They had a strong emulation to obtain the prince=E2= =80=99s esteem; and the princes had the same emulation to distinguish thems= elves in the bravery and number of their companions. =E2=80=9CTheir dignity= and power,=E2=80=9D continues Tacitus, =E2=80=9Cconsists in being constant= ly surrounded with a multitude of young and chosen people: this they reckon= their ornament Edition: curr= ent; Page: [362] in peace, this their defence and support in war. Their na= me becomes famous at home, and among neighbouring nations, when they excel = all others in the number and courage of their companions: they receive pres= ents and embassies from all parts. Reputation frequently decides the fate o= f war. In battle it is infamy in the prince to be surpassed in courage; it = is infamy in the companions not to follow the brave example of their prince= , it is an eternal disgrace to survive him. To defend him is their most sac= red engagement. If a city be at peace, the princes go to those who are at w= ar; and it is thus they retain a great number of friends. To these they giv= e the war-horse and the terrible javelin. Their pay consists in coarse but = plentiful repasts. The prince supports his liberality merely by war and plu= nder. You might easier persuade them to attack an enemy, and to expose them= selves to the dangers of war, than to cultivate the land, or to attend to t= he cares of husbandry; they refuse to acquire by sweat what they can purcha= se with blood.=E2=80=9D

Thus, among the Germans there were vassa= ls, but no fiefs; they had no fiefs, because the princes had no lands to gi= ve; or rather their fiefs consisted in horses trained for war, in arms, and= feasting. There were vassals, because there were trusty men who being boun= d by their word engaged to follow the prince to the field, and did very nea= r the same service as was afterwards performed for the fiefs.

CHAP. IV.: The same Subject continued.
C=C3=86SAR* says, that =E2=80=9Cwhen any of the princes declar= ed to the assembly that he intended to set out Edition: current; Page: [<= /span>363] upon an expedition, and as= ked them to follow him, those who approved the leader, and the enterprize, = stood up and offered their assistance. Upon which they were commended by th= e multitude. But if they did not fulfil their engagements, they lost the pu= blic esteem, and were looked upon as deserters and traitors.=E2=80=9D

What C=C3=A6sar says in this place, and = what we have extracted in the preceding chapter from Tacitus, is the substa= nce of the history of our princes of the first race.

We must not therefore be surprized, that= our kings should have new armies to raise upon every expedition, new troop= s to encourage, new people to engage; that to acquire much they were oblige= d to incur great expences; that they should be constant gainers by the divi= sion of lands and spoils, and yet give these lands and spoils incessantly a= way: that their demesne should continually increase and diminish; that a fa= ther upon settling a kingdom=E2=80=A1 could not give part of it to foreigners, even in port= ion with his daughter, without the consent of the other kings. The monarchy= moved by springs, which they were continually obliged to wind up.

CHAP. V.: Of the Conquests of the Franks.
IT is not true, that the Franks upon ent= ering Gaul, took possession of the whole country to turn it into Edition: current; Page: [364] fiefs. S= ome have been of this opinion, because they saw the greatest part of the co= untry towards the end of the second race, converted into fiefs, rear-fiefs,= or other dependencies; but such a disposition was owing to particular caus= es, which we shall explain hereafter.

The consequence which sundry writers wou= ld infer from thence, that the Barbarians made a general regulation for est= ablishing in all parts the state of villainage, is as false as the principl= e from which it is derived. If at a time when the fiefs were precarious, al= l the lands of the kingdom had been fiefs or dependencies of fiefs, and all= the men in the kingdom vassals or bondmen, subordinate to vassals; as the = person that has property is every possessed of power, the king who continua= lly disposed of the fiefs, that is, of the only property then existing, wou= ld have been as arbitrary a monarch as the Grand Seignior; which is absolut= ely contradictory to all history.

CHAP. VI.: Of the Got= hs, Burgundians, and Franks.
GAUL was invaded by German nations. The = Visigoths took possession of the province of Narbonue, and of almost all th= e south; the Burgundians settled in the east; and the Franks subdued very n= ear all the rest.

No doubt but these Barbarians retained i= n their respective conquests the manners, inclinations, and usages of their= own country; for no nation can change in an instant their manner of thinki= ng and acting. These people in Germany neglected agriculture. It seems by C= =C3=A6sar and Tacitus, that they applied themselves greatly to a pastoral l= ife: hence the regulations of the codes of the barbarian laws are almost al= l relating Edition: current; = Page: [365] to their flocks. Roricon, who wrote a history among the Franks= , was a shepherd.

CHAP. VII.: Different Ways of dividing the = Land.
AFTER the Goths and Burgundians had unde= r various pretences penetrated into the heart of the empire, the Romans, in= order to put a stop to their devastations, were obliged to provide for the= ir subsistence. At first they allowed them* corn; but afterwards chose to give them lands. The em= perors, or the Roman=E2=80= =A0 magistrates in their name, made particular conventions with them co= ncerning the division of lands, as we find in the chronicles and in the cod= es of the Visigoths=E2=80= =A1 and Burgundians.= =C2=A7

The Franks did not follow the same plan.= In the Salic and Ripuarian laws we find not the least vestige of any such = division of lands: they had conquered the country, and so took what they pl= eased, making no regulations but amongst themselves.

Let us therefore distinguish between the= conduct of the Burgundians and Visigoths in Gaul, of those same Visigoths = in Spain, of the=E2=88=A5<= /a> auxiliary troops under Augustulus and Odoacer in Italy, and that of the= Franks in Gaul, as also of the Vandals** in Africa. The former entered into conventions with the= antient inhabitants, and in consequence thereof made a division Edition: current; Page: [366] of lands= between them; the latter did no such thing.

CHAP. VIII.: The same Subject continued.
WHAT has induced some to think that the = Roman lands were entirely usurped by the barbarians, is their finding in th= e laws of the Visigoths and the Burgundians, that these two nations had two= thirds of the lands: but this they took only in certain quarters or distri= cts assigned them.

Gundebald* says in the law of the Burgundians, that his people= at their establishment had two-thirds of the lands allowed them; and the s= econd supplement=E2=80=A0<= /a> to this law takes notice, that only a moiety would be allowed to those = who should hereafter come to live in that country. Therefore all the lands = had not been divided in the beginning between the Roman and the Burgundians= .

In those two regulations we meet with th= e same expressions in the text; consequently they explain one another; and = as the latter cannot mean an universal division of lands, neither can this = signification be given to the former.

The Franks acted with the same moderatio= n as the Burgundians; they did not strip the Romans wherever they extended = their conquests. What would they have done with so much land? They took wha= t suited them, and left the remainder.

=20 Edition: current; Page: [367]
CHAP. IX.: A just application of the Law of= the Burgundians and of that of the Visigoths in relation to the division of Lands.
IT is to be considered that those divisi= ons of land were not made with a tyrannical spirit; but with a view of reli= eving the reciprocal wants of two nations that were to inhabit the same cou= ntry.

The law of the Burgundians ordains that = a Burgundian shall be received in an hospitable manner by a Roman. This is = agreeable to the manners of the Germans, who, according to Tacitus,* were the most hospitable pe= ople in the world.

By the law of the Burgundians, it is ord= ained, that the Burgundians shall have two-thirds of the lands, and one thi= rd of the bondmen. In this it considered the genius of two nations, and con= formed to the manner in which they procured their subsistence. As the Burgu= ndians dealt chiefly in cattle, they wanted a great deal of land and few bo= ndmen, and the Romans from their application to agriculture had need of les= s land and of a greater number of bondmen. The woods were equally divided, = because their wants in this respect were the same.

We find in the code=E2=80=A0 of the Burgundians, that each Bar= barian was placed near a Roman. The division therefore was not general; but= the Romans who gave the division, were equal in numbers to the Burgundians= who received it. The Roman was injured the least possible. The Burgundians= as a martial people, fond of hunting and of a pastoral life, did not refus= e to accept of the fallow grounds; while the Romans kept such lands as were= properest for Edition: curre= nt; Page: [368] agriculture: the Burgundian=E2=80=99s flock fattened the R= oman=E2=80=99s field.

CHAP. X.: Of Servitudes.
THE law of the Burgundians=E2=80=A1 takes notice, that when th= ose people settled in Gaul, they were allowed two-thirds of the land, and o= ne-third of the bondmen. The state of villainage was therefore=C2=A7 established in that part of = Gaul before it was invaded by the Burgundians.

The law of the Burgundians in points rel= ating to the two nations makes a formal=E2=80=A0 distinction in both, between the nobles, the fre= e-born, and the bondmen, Servitude was not therefore a thing particular to = the Romans; nor liberty and nobility particular to the Barbarians.

This very same law says,* that if a Burgundian freedman had no= t given a particular sum to his master, nor received a third share of a Rom= an, he was always supposed to belong to his master=E2=80=99s family. The Ro= man proprietor was therefore free, since he did not belong to another perso= n=E2=80=99s family; he was free, because his third portion was a mark of li= berty.

We need only open the Salic and Ripuaria= n laws, to be satisfied that the Romans were no more in a state of servitud= e among the Franks, than among the other conquerors of Gaul.

The count de Boulainvilliers is mistaken= in the capital point of his system: he has not proved that the Edition: current; Page: [369] Franks ma= de a general regulation to reduce the Romans into a kind of servitude.

As this author=E2=80=99s work is penned = without art, and as he speaks with the simplicity, frankness, and candor of= that ancient nobility from whence he descends, every one is capable of jud= ging of the fine things he says, and of the errors into which he is fallen.= I shall not therefore undertake to criticise him; I shall only observe, th= at he had more wit than sense, more sense than knowledge; though his knowle= dge was not contemptible, for he was well acquainted with the most valuable= part of our history and laws.

The count de Boulainvilliers, and the ab= b=C3=A9 du Bos, have formed two different systems, one of which seems to be= a conspiracy against the commons, and the other against the nobility. When= the sun gave leave to Phaeton to drive his chariot, he said to him, =E2=80= =9CIf you ascend too high, you will burn the heavenly mansions; if you desc= end too low, you will reduce the earth to ashes: Do not drive to the right,= you will meet there with the constellation of the serpent; avoid going too= much to the left, you will there fall in with that of the altar: keep in t= he middle*.=E2=80=9D

CHAP. XI.: The same Subject continued.
WHAT first gave rise to the notion of a = general regulation made at the time of the conquest, is our meeting with a = prodigious number of servitudes in France towards the beginning of the thir= d race; and Edition: current;= Page: [370]<= /span> as the continual progression of these servitudes was not atte= nded to, people imagined in an age of obscurity a general law which was nev= er framed.

Towards the commencement of the first ra= ce, we meet with an infinite number of freemen, both among the Franks and t= he Romans; but the number of bondmen increased to that degree, that at the = beginning of the third race, all the husbandmen and almost all the inhabita= nts=E2=80=A0 of towns = were become bondmen: and whereas at the first period there was very near th= e same administration in the cities as among the Romans; namely, a corporat= on, a senate, and courts of judicature; at the other we hardly meet with an= y thing but a lord and his bondmen.

When the Franks, Burgundians, and Goths,= made their several invasions, they seized upon gold, silver, moveables, cl= oaths, men, women, boys, and whatever the army could carry; the whole was b= rought to one place, and divided amongst the army=E2=80=A1. History shews, that after the first s= ettlement, that is after the first devastations, they entered into an agree= ment with the inhabitants, and left them all their political and civil righ= ts. This was the law of nations in those days; they plundered every thing i= n time of war, and granted every thing in time of peace. Were it not so, ho= w should we find both in the Salic and Burgundian laws such a number of reg= ulations absolutely contrary to a general servitude of the people?

But though the conquest was not immediat= ely productive of servitude, it arose nevertheless from the same law of nat= ions=C2=A7 which subsi= sted after the conquest. Opposition, revolts, and the taking of towns, Edition: current; Page: [371] we= re followed by the slavery of the inhabitants. And, not to mention the wars= which the conquering nations made against one another, as there was this p= articularity among the Franks, that the different partitions of the monarch= y gave rise continually to civil wars between brothers or nephews, in which= this law of nations was constantly practised, servitudes of course became = more general in Franee than in other countries: and this is, I believe, one= of the causes of the difference between our French laws and those of Italy= and Spain, in respect to the right of seignories.

The conquest was soon over; and the law = of nations then in force was productive of some servile dependencies. The c= ustom of the same law of nations, which obtained for many ages, gave a prod= igious extent to those servitudes.

Theodoric imagining that the people of A= uvergne were not faithful to him, thus addressed the Franks of his division= : =E2=80=9CFollow me, and I will carry you into a country where you shall h= ave gold, silver, captives, clothes, and flocks in abundance; and you shall= remove all the people into your own country.=E2=80=9D

After the conclusion of the peace* between Gontram and Chilper= ic, the troops employed in the siege of Bourges having had orders to return= , carried such a considerable booty away with them, that they hardly left e= ither men or cattle in the country.

Theodoric, king of Italy, whose spirit a= nd policy it was ever to distinguish himself from the other barbarian kings= , upon sending an army into Gaul, wrote thus to the General=E2=80=A0 =E2=80=9CIt is my will that = the Roman laws be followed, and that you restore the fugitive slaves to the= ir right owners. The defender of liberty Edition: current; Page: [= 372] ought not to encourage servants = to desert their masters. Let other kings delight in the plunder and devasta= tion of the towns which they have subdued; we are desirous to conquer in su= ch a manner, that our subjects shall lament their having fallen too late un= der our government.=E2=80=9D It is evident, that his intention was to cast = an odium on the king=E2=80=99s of the Franks and the Burgundians, and that = he alluded in the above passage to their particular law of nations.

Yet this law of nations continued in for= ce under the second race. King Pepin=E2=80=99s army, having penetrated into= Aquitaine, returned to France loaded with an immense booty, and with a vas= t number of bondmen, as we are informed by the annals of Metz*.

Here might I quote numberless=E2=80=A0 authorities; and as the= public compassion was raised at the sight of those miseries, as several ho= ly prelates, beholding the captives in chains, employed the treasure belong= ing to the church, and sold even the sacred utensils, to ransom as many as = they could; and as several holy monks exerted themselves on that occasion, = it is in the=E2=80=A1 = lives of the saints that we meet with the best eclaircissements on this sub= ject. And, although it may be objected to the authors of those lives, that = they have been sometimes a little too credulous in respect to things which = God has certainly performed, if they were in the order of his providence; y= et we draw considerable lights from thence, with regard to the manners and = usages of those times.

Edition: current; Page: [373]
When we cast an eye upon the monuments o= f our history and laws, the whole seems to be an immense expanse,=E2=80=A1 or a boundless ocean: = all those frigid, dry, crude writings must be devoured in the same manner, = as Saturn is fabled to have devoured the stones.

A vast quantity of land which had been i= n the hands of freemen,= =C2=A7 was changed into mortmain, when the country was stripped of its = free inhabitants; those who had a great multitude of bondmen either took la= rge territories by force, or had them yielded by agreement, and built villa= ges, as may be seen in different charters. On the other hand, the freemen w= ho cultivated the arts, found themselves reduced to exercise those arts in = a state of servitude: thus the servitudes restored to the arts and to agric= ulture whatever they had lost.

It was a customary thing with the propri= etors of land, to give them to the churches, in order to hold them themselv= es by a quit-rent, thinking to partake by their servitude of the sanctity o= f the churches.

CHAP. XII.: That the lands belonging to the= division of the Barbarians paid no taxes.
A PEOPLE remarkable for their simplicity= and poverty, a free and martial people, who lived without any other indust= ry than that of tending their flocks, and who had nothing but rush cottages= to attach them to their= =E2=88=A5 lands; such a people, I say, must have followed their chiefs = for the sake of booty, Editio= n: current; Page: [374] and not to pay or to raise taxes. The art of tax-g= athering is generally invented too late, and when men begin to enjoy the fe= licity of other arts.

The transient* tax of a pitcher of wine for every acre, which = was one of the exactions of Chilperic and Fredegonda, related only to the R= omans. And indeed it was not the Franks that tore the rolls of those taxes,= but the clergy who in those days were all Romans. The burthen of this tax = lay chiefly on the inhabitants=E2=80=A0 of the towns; now these were almost all inhabited by Roma= ns.

Gregory of Tours=E2=80=A1 relates, that a certain judge was ob= liged after the death of Chilperic to take refuge in a church, for having u= nder the reign of that prince ordered taxes to be levied on several Franks,= who in the reign of Childebert were ingenui, o= r freeborn: =E2=80=9CMultos de Francis, qui tempore Childeberti regis ingen= ui fuerant, publico tributo subegit.=E2=80=9D Therefore the Franks who were= not bondmen paid no taxes.

There is not a grammarian but would be a= shamed to see how the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=C2=A7 has interpreted this passage. He observes, that in t= hose days the freedmen were also called ingenui. Upon this supposition he renders the Latin word inge= nui, by freed from taxes; a phrase, whic= h we indeed may use, as freed from cares, freed from p= unishments; but in the Latin tongue, such expressions as ingenui a tributis, libertini a tributis, manumissi tributorum, would be quite monstrous.

Parthenius, says Gregory of Tours=E2=88=A5 had like to have be= en put to death by the Franks for subjecting Edition: current; Page: [375] them to taxes. The Abb=C3=A9= du Bos finding himself hard pressed by this passage* very coolly supposes the thing in question:= it was, he says, an extraordinary duty.

We find in the law of the Visigoths=E2=80=A0, that when a Barb= arian had seized upon the estate of a Roman, the judge obliged him to sell = it, to the end that this estate might continue to be tributary; consequentl= y the Barbarians paid no taxes=E2=80=A1.

The Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=C2=A7 who, to support his system, would f= ain have the Visigoths subject to taxes=E2=88=A5, quits the literal and spiritual sense of the la= w, and pretends upon no other indeed than an imaginary foundation, that bet= ween the establishment of the Goths and this law there had been an augmenta= tion of taxes which related only to the Romans. But none but father Harduin= are allowed thus to exercise an arbitrary power over facts.

This learned author** has rumaged Justinian=E2=80=99s code=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0, in sea= rch of laws, to prove that among the Romans the military benefices were sub= ject to taxes. From whence he would infer that the same held good with rega= rd to fiefs or benefices among the Franks. But the opinion that our fiefs d= erive their origin from that institution of the Romans, is Edition: current; Page: [376] at present exp= loded; it obtained only at a time when the Roman history, but not ours, was= well understood, and our ancient records lay buried in obscurity and dust.=

But the Abb=C3=A9 is in the wrong to quo= te Cassiodorus, and to make use of what was transacting in Italy, and in th= e part of Gaul subject to Theodoric, in order to acquaint us with the pract= ice established among the Franks; these are things which must not be confou= nded. I propose shewing, some time or other, in a particular work, that the= plan of the monarchy of the Ostrogoths was intirely indifferent from that = of any other government founded in those days by the other Barbarian nation= s; and so far are we entitled to affirm that a practice obtained among the = Franks, because it was established among the Ostrogoths, that on the contra= ry we have just reason to think that a custom of the Ostrogoths was not in = force among the Franks.

The hardest task for persons of extensiv= e erudition, is to deduce their arguments from passages not foreign to the = subject, and to find, if we may be allowed to express ourselves in astronom= ical terms, the true place of the sun.

The same author makes a wrong use of the= capitularies, as well as of the historians and laws of the barbarous natio= ns. When he wants the Franks to pay taxes, he applies to freemen what can b= e understood only of* = bondmen; when he speaks of their military service, he applies to=E2=80=A0 bondmen what can never = relate but to freemen.

=20 Edition: current; Page: [377]
CHAP. XIII.: Of Taxes paid by the Romans and Gauls, in the m= onarchy of the Franks.
I MIGHT here examine whether after the G= auls and Romans were conquered, they continued to pay the taxes to which th= ey were subject under the emperors. But, for the sake of brevity, I shall b= e satisfied with observing that if they paid them in the beginning, they we= re soon after exempted, and that those taxes were changed into a military s= ervice. For I confess I cannot conceive how the Franks should have been at = first such great friends, and afterwards such sudden and violent enemies, t= o taxes.

A capitulary* of Lewis the Debonnaire explains extremely well = the situation of the freemen in the monarchy of the Franks. Some troops=E2=80=A0 of Goths or Iber= ians, flying from the oppression of the Moors, were received into Lewis=E2= =80=99s dominions. The agreement made with them was, that like other freeme= n they should follow their count to the army; and that upon a march they sh= ould mount guard=E2=80=A1<= /a> and patrol under the command also of their count; and that they should = furnish horses and carriages for baggage to the king=E2=80=99s=E2=88=A5 commissaries and to the a= mbassadors in their way to and from court; and that they should not be comp= elled to pay any further acknowledgment, but should be treated as the other= freemen.

Edition: current; Page: [378]
It cannot be said that these were new us= ages introduced towards the commencement of the second race. This must be r= eferred at least to the middle or to the end of the first. A capitulary of = the year* 864, says in= express terms, that it was the ancient custom for freemen to perform milit= ary service, and to furnish likewise the horses and carriages above mention= ed; duties particular to themselves, and from which those who possessed the= fiefs were exempt, as we shall prove hereafter.

This is not all; there was a regulation<= a href=3D"https://oll.libertyfund.org/title/montesquieu-complete-works-vol-= 2-the-spirit-of-laws#lf0171-02_footnote_nt_943" id=3D"lf0171-02_footnote_nt= _943_ref" class=3D"footnote-link type-footnote">=E2=80=A0 which hardly = permitted the imposing of taxes on those freemen. He who had sour manors=E2=80=A1 was always obli= ged to march against the enemy: he who had but three, was joined with a fre= eman that had only one; the latter bore the fourth part of the other=E2=80= =99s charges, and staid at home. In like manner, they joined two freemen wh= o had each two manors; he who went to the army had half his charges borne b= y him who staid at home.

Again, we have an infinite number of cha= rters, in which the privileges of fiefs are granted to lands or districts p= ossessed by freemen, and of which I shall make farther mention hereafter=E2=88=A5. These lands ar= e exempted from all the duties or services, which were required of them by = the counts, and by the rest of the Edition: current; Page: [379] king=E2=80=99s officers: and as all th= ese services are particularly enumerated, without making any mention of tax= es, it is manifest that no taxes were imposed upon them.

It was very natural that the Roman art o= f tax-gathering should fall of itself in the monarchy of the Franks: it was= a most complicate art, far above the conception, and wide from the plan, o= f those simple people. Were the Tartars to over-run Europe, we should find = it very difficult to make them comprehend what is meant by our financiers.<= /p>

The* anonymous author of the life of Lewis the Debonnaire, spe= aking of the counts and other officers of the nation of the Franks, whom Ch= arlemaign established in Aquitania, says, that he intrusted them with the c= are of defending the frontiers, as also with the military power and the dir= ection of the demesnes belonging to the crown. This shews the state of the = royal revenues under the second race. The prince had kept his demesnes in h= is own hands, and employed his bondmen in improving them. But the indiction= s, the capitations, and other imposts raised at the time of the emperors on= the persons or goods of freemen, had been changed into an obligation of de= fending the frontiers, and marching against the enemy.

In the same history=E2=80=A0, we find that Lewis the Debonnair= e having been to wait upon his father in Germany, this prince asked him, wh= y he, who was a crowned head, came to be so poor: to which Lewis made answe= r, that he was only a nominal king, and that the great lords were possessed= of almost all his demesnes; that Charlemaign, being apprehensive lest this= young prince should forfeit their affection, if he attempted himself to re= sume what he had inconsiderately Edition: current; Page: [380] granted, appointed commissaries to resto= re things to their former situation.

The bishops writings=E2=80=A1 to Lewis brother to Charles the = Bald, use these words: =E2=80=9CTake care of your lands, that you may not b= e obliged to travel continually by the houses of the clergy, and to tire th= eir bondmen with carriages. Manage your affairs, continue they, in such a m= anner, that you may have enough to live upon, and to receive embassies.=E2= =80=9D It is evident, that the king=E2=80=99s revenues* in those days consisted of their demesnes= .

CHAP. XIV.: Of what they called Census.
AFTER the Barbarians had quitted their o= wn country, they were desirous of reducing their usages into writing; but a= s they found a difficulty in writing German words with Roman letters, they = published these laws in Latin.

In the confusion and rapidity of the con= quest, most things changed their nature; in order however to express them, = they were obliged to make use of such old Latin words, as were most analogo= us to the new usages. Thus whatever was likely to revive=E2=80=A0 the idea of the ancient census = of the Romans, they called by the name of census tribu= tum; and when things had Edition: current; Page: [381] no relation at all to the Roman census, t= hey expressed, as well as they could, the German words by Roman letters: th= us they formed the word fredum, on which I shal= l have occasion to descant in the following chapters.

The words census and tributum having been employed in an ar= bitrary manner, this has thrown some obscurity on the signification in whic= h these words were used under our princes of the first and second race. And= modern* authors who h= ave adopted particular systems, having found these words in the writings of= those days, imagined that what was then called census, was exactly the cen= sus of the Romans; and from thence they inferred this consequence, that our= kings of the two first races had put themselves in the place of the Roman = emperors, and made no change in =E2=80=A1their administration. Besides, as particular duties rais= ed under the second race were by change and by certain=E2=88=A5 restrictions converted into other= s, they inferred from thence that these duties were the census of the Roman= s; and, as since the modern regulations, they found that the crown demesnes= were absolutely unalienable, they pretended that those duties which repres= ented the Roman census, and did not form a part of the demesnes, were mere = usurpation. I omit the other consequences.

To apply the ideas of the present time t= o distant ages, is a source of error. To these people who want to modernize= all the ancient ages, I shall say what the Egyptian priests said to Solon,= =E2=80=9CO Athenians, you are mere children!=E2=80=9D

=20 Edition: current; Page: [382]
CHAP. XV.: That what they called census was raised only on the bondmen, and not on the fr= eemen.
THE king, the clergy, and the lords rais= ed regular taxes, each on the bondmen of their respective demesnes. I prove= it with respect to the king, by the capitulary de Vil= lis; with regard to the clergy, by the codes of the* laws of the Barbarians; and with rel= ation to the lords, by the regulations=E2=80=A0 which Charlemaign made concerning this subject.

These taxes were called census; they were =C5=93conomical and not fiscal duties, mere p= rivate services and not public obligations.

I affirm, that what they called census at that time, was a tax raised upon the bondmen.= This I prove by a formulary of Marculfus containing a permission from the = king to enter into holy orders, provided the persons be* free-born, and not enrolled in the regis= ter of the census. I prove it also by a commiss= ion from Charlemaign to a count=E2=80=A1, whom he had sent into Saxony; which contains the infran= chisement of the Saxons for having embraced Christianity, and is properly a= charter of freedom=E2=88= =A5. This prince restores them to their former=C2=A7 civil liberty, and exempts them from pay= ing the census. It was therefore the Edition: current; Page: [383<= span class=3D"bracket">] same thing to be a bondman as to pay= the census, to be free as not to pay it.

By a kind of letters patent* of the same prince in favour of t= he Spaniards, who had been received into the monarchy, the counts are forbi= d to demand any census of them, or to deprive them of their lands. That str= angers upon their coming to France were treated as bondmen, is a thing well= known; and Charlemaign being desirous they should be considered as freemen= , since he would have them be proprietors of their lands, forbade the deman= ding any census of them.

A capitulary of Charles the Bald=E2=80=A0, given in favour of= those very Spaniards, orders them to be treated like the other Franks, and= forbids the requiring any census of them: consequently this census was not= paid by freemen.

The thirtieth article of the edict of Pi= stes reforms the abuse, by which several of the husbandmen belonging to the= king or to the church, sold the lands dependent on their manors to ecclesi= astics or to people of their condition, reserving only a small cottage to t= hemselves; by which means they avoided paying the census; and, it ordains, = that things should be restored to their primitive situation: the census was= therefore a tax peculiar to bondmen.

From thence also it follows, that there = was no general census in the monarchy; and this is clear from a great numbe= r of passages. For what could be the meaning of this=E2=80=A1 capitulary? =E2=80=9CWe ordain that= the Edition: current; Page: = [384]<= /span> royal census should be levied in all places, where formerly it was=E2=80=A0 lawfully levie= d.=E2=80=9D What could be the meaning of that in which=E2=80=A1 Charlemaign orders his commissari= es in the provinces to make an exact enquiry into all the census=E2=80=99s = that belonged in former times=E2=88=A5 to the king=E2=80=99s demesne? And of that=C2=A7 in which he disposes of the cen= sus=E2=80=99s paid by those* of whom they are demanded? What can that other capitulary=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0 mean, in which= we read, =E2=80=9CIf any person=E2=80=A1=E2=80=A1 has acquired a tributary land, on which we wer= e accustomed to levy the census?=E2=80=9D And that other in fine=E2=88=A5=E2=88=A5, in which Char= les the Bald=C2=A7=C2=A7 makes mention of the lands, whose census had from time immemorial belong= ed to the king.

Observe that there are some passages whi= ch seem at first sight to be contrary to what I have said, and yet confirm = it. We have already seen that the freemen in the monarchy were obliged only= to furnish particular carriages; the capitulary just now cited gives to th= is** the name of censu= s, and opposes it to the census paid by the bondmen.

Besides, the edict=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0 of Pistes takes = notice of those freemen who are obliged to pay the royal census for Edition: current; Page: [385] their= =E2=80=A1 head and for= their cottages, and who had sold themselves during the famine. The king or= ders them to be ransomed. This is=E2=88=A5 because those who were manumitted by the king=E2=80=99= s letters, did not, generally speaking, acquire a full and perfect=C2=A7 liberty, but they paid= censum in capite; and these are the people her= e meant.

We must therefore explode the idea of a = general and universal census, in imitation of that of the Romans, from whic= h census the rights of the lords are also supposed to have been derived by = usurpation. What was called census in the Frenc= h monarchy, independently of the abuse made of that word, was a particular = tax imposed on the bondmen by their masters.

I beg the reader to excuse the trouble I= must give him with such a number of citations. I should be more concise, d= id I not meet with the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=99s book on the establishment= of the French monarchy in Gaul, continually in my way. Nothing is a greate= r obstacle to our progress in knowledge, than a bad performance of a celebr= ated author; because, before we instruct, we must begin with undeceiving.

CHAP. XVI.: Of the feudal Lords or Vassals.=
I HAVE taken notice of those volunteers = among the Germans, who followed their princes in their <= span class=3D"decoration">Edition: current; Page: [386] several expedition= s. The same usage continued after the conquest. Tacitus mentions them by th= e name of companions*;= the Salic law by that of men who have vowed fealty=E2=80=A0 to the king; the formularies of=E2=80=A1 Marculfus by that= of the king=E2=80=99s Antrustios=E2=88=A5, the earliest French historians by that of Leudes=C2=A7, faithful and loyal;= and those of later date by that of vassals** and lords.

In the Salic and Ripuarian laws we meet = with an infinite number of regulations in regard to the Franks, and only wi= th a few for the Antrustios. The regulations concerning the Antrustios are = different from those which were made for the other Franks; they are full of= what relates to the settling of the property of the Franks, but mention no= t a word concerning that of the Antrustios. This is because the property of= the latter was regulated rather by the political than by the civil law, an= d was the share that fell to an army, and not the patrimony of a family.

The goods reserved for the feudal lords = were called fiscal=E2=80= =A0=E2=80=A0 goods, benefices, honours, and fiefs, by different authors= , and in different times.

There is no doubt but the fiefs at first= were at will=E2=80=A1=E2= =80=A1. We find in Gregory of Tours=E2=88=A5=E2=88=A5, that Sunegisilus and Gallomanus were d= eprived of all they held of the exchequer, and no more was left them than t= heir real property. When Gontram raised his Edition: current; Page: [387] nephew Childebert to the thr= one, he had a private conference with him, in which he named* the persons who ought to be honoure= d with, and those who ought to be deprived of, the fiefs. In a formulary=E2=80=A0 of Marculfus, t= he king gives in exchange not only the benefices held by his exchequer, but= likewise those which had been held by another. The law of the Lombards opp= oses=E2=80=A1 the bene= fices to property. In this our historians, the formularies, the codes of th= e different barbarous nations, and all the monuments of those days, are una= nimous. In fine, the writers of the book of fiefs=E2=88=A5 inform us, that at first the lords cou= ld take them back when they pleased, that afterwards they granted them for = the space of a year=C2=A7<= /a>, and that at length they gave them for life.

CHAP. XVII.: Of the Military Service of Fre= emen.
TWO sorts of people were bound to milita= ry service; the great and lesser vassals, who were obliged in consequence o= f their fief; and the freemen, whether Franks, Romans, or Gauls, who served= under the count, and were commanded by him and his officers.

The name of freemen was given to those, = who on the one hand had no benefices or fiefs, and on the Edition: current; Page: [388] other were not = subject to the base services of villainage; the lands they possessed were w= hat they called allodial estates.

The counts* assembled the freemen, and led them against the en= emy; they had officers under them who were called=E2=80=A0 vicars; and as all the freemen were di= vided into hundreds, which constituted what they called a borough, the coun= ts had also officers under them, who were denominated = centenarii, and led the freemen=E2=80=A1 of the borough, or their hundreds, to the field.<= /p>

This division into hundreds is posterior= to the establishment of the Franks in Gaul. It was made by Clotharius and = Childebert, with a view of obliging each district to answer for the robberi= es committed in their division; this we find in the decrees=E2=88=A5 of those princes. A regulati= on of this kind is to this very day observed in England.

As the counts led the freemen against th= e enemy, the feudal lords commanded also their vassals or rearvassals; and = the bishops, abbots, or their=C2=A7 advocates likewise commanded theirs**.

The bishops were greatly embarrassed, an= d=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0 in= consistent with themselves; they requested of Charlemaign not to oblige the= m any longer to a military service; and when he granted their request, they= complained that he had deprived them of the public esteem: so that this pr= ince was obliged to justify his Edition: current; Page: [389] intentions upon this head. Be that as it = may, when they were exempted from marching against the enemy, I do not find= that their vassals were led by the counts; on the contrary, we see* that the kings or the bisho= ps chose one of their feudatories to conduct them.

In a capitulary=E2=80=A0 of Lewis the Debonnaire, this prince = distinguishes three sorts of vassals, those belonging to the king, those to= the bishops, and those to the counts. The=E2=80=A1 vassals of a feudal lord were not led again= st the enemy by the count, except some employment in the king=E2=80=99s hou= shold hindered the lord himself from commanding them.

But who is it that led the feudal lords = into the field? No doubt the king himself, who was always at the head of hi= s faithful vassals. Hence we constantly find in the capitularies a distinct= ion made=E2=88=A5 be= tween the king=E2=80=99s vassals and those of the bishops. Such brave and m= agnanimous princes as our kings, did not take the field to put themselves a= t the head of an ecclesiastic militia; these were not the men they chose to= conquer or to die with.

But these laws carried their vassals and= rear-vassals with them; as we can prove by the capitulary*, in which Charlemaign ordains that = every freeman, who has four manors either in his own property, Edition: current; Page: [390] or as a b= enefice from some body else, should march against the enemy or follow his l= ord. It is evident, that Charlemaign means, that the person who had a manor= of his own should march under the count, and he who held a benefice of a l= ord, should set out along with him.

And yet the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=A0 pretends, that when me= ntion is made in the capitularies, of tenants who depended on a particular = lord, no others are meant than bondmen; and he grounds his opinion on the l= aw of the Visigoths, and the practice of that nation. It is much better to = rely on the capitularies themselves; that which I have just quoted, says ex= pressly the contrary. The treaty between Charles the Bald and his brothers,= takes notice also of freemen, who might chuse to follow either a lord or t= he king; and this regulation is conformable to a great many others.

We may therefore conclude, that there we= re three sorts of military services; that of the king=E2=80=99s vassals, wh= o had no other vassals under them; that of the bishops or of the other cler= gy, and their vassals, and, in fine, that of the count, who commanded the f= reemen.

Not but the vassals might be also subjec= t to the count; as those who have a particular command are subordinate to h= im, who is invested with a more general authority.

We even find that the count and the king= =E2=80=99s commissaries might oblige them to pay the fine, when they had no= t fulfilled the engagements of their fief. In like manner if the king=E2=80= =99s vassals=E2=80=A1 committed any outrage, they were subject to the correction of the count, = unless they chose rather to submit to that of the king.

=20 Edition: current; Page: [391]
CHAP. XVIII.: Of the double Service.
IT was a fundamental principle of the mo= narchy, that whosoever was subject to the military power of another person,= was subject also to his civil jurisdiction. Thus the capitulary* of Lewis the Debonnaire in th= e year 815, makes the military power of the count, and his civil jurisdicti= on over the freemen, keep always an equal pace. Thus the placita=E2=80= =A0 of the count who carried the freemen against the enemy, were=E2=80=A1 called the placit= a of the freemen; from whence undoubtedly came this maxim, that the questio= ns relating to liberty could be decided only in the count=E2=80=99s placita= , and not in those of his officers. Thus the count never led the vassals=C2=A7 belonging to the= bishops or to the abbots against the enemy, because they were not subject = to this civil jurisdiction. Thus he never commanded the rear-vassals belong= ing to the king=E2=80=99s vassals. Thus the glossary** of the English laws informs us, that tho= se to whom=E2=80=A0=E2= =80=A0 the Saxons gave the name of Coples, = were by the Normans called Counts, or companions, because they shared the justiciary fines wit= h the King. Thus we see, that at all times the Edition: current; Page: [<= /span>392] duty of a vassal=E2=80=A1=E2=80=A1 towards his= lord, was to bear arms= =C2=A7=C2=A7, and to try his peers in his court.

One of the reasons which produced this c= onnexion between the judiciary right and that of leading the forces against= the enemy, was because the person who led them exacted at the same time th= e payment of the fiscal duties, which consisted in some carriage services d= ue by the freemen, and in general in certain judiciary profits, of which we= shall treat hereafter.

The lords had the right of administring = justice in their fief, by the same principle as the counts had it in their = counties. And indeed the counties in the several variations that happened a= t different times, always followed the variations of the fiefs; both were g= overned by the same plan, and by the same principles. In a word, the counts= in their counties were lords, and the lords in their seignories were count= s.

It has been a mistake to consider the co= unts as civil officers, and the dukes as military commanders. Both were equ= ally civil=E2=88=A5 = and military officers: the whole difference consisted in the duke=E2=80=99s= having several counts under him, though there were counts who had no duke = over them, as we learn from Fredegarius*

It will be imagined perhaps that the gov= ernment of the Franks must have been very severe at that time, since the sa= me officers were invested with a military and civil power, nay, even with a= fiscal authority, over the subjects; which in the Edition: current; Page: [393] preceding books I have= observed to be distinguishing marks of despotism.

But we must not believe that the counts = pronounced judgment by themselves, and administered justice in the same man= ner as the bashaws in Turky; in order to judge affairs, they assembled a ki= nd of assizes, where the principal men appeared.

To the end we may thoroughly understand = what relates to the judicial proceedings, in the formulas, in the laws of t= he barbarians, and in the capitularies, it is proper to observe that the fu= nctions of the count, of the Grafio or fiscal j= udge, and the Centenarius, were the same; that = the judges, the Rathimburgers, and the sheriffs= , were the same persons under different names. These were the counts assist= ants, and were generally seven in number; and as he was obliged to have twe= lve persons to judge=E2= =80=A0, he filled up the number with the principal men=E2=80=A1.

But whoever had the jurisdiction, the ki= ng, the count, the Grafio, the Centenarius, the lords, or the clergy, they never tried causes = alone; and this usage, which derived its origin from the forests of Germany= , was still continued even after the fiefs had assumed a new form.

With regard to the fiscal power, its nat= ure was such, that the count could hardly abuse it. The rights of the princ= e in respect to the freemen, were so simple, that they consisted only, as w= e have already observed, in certain carriages which were=E2=88=A5 demanded of them on some pub= lic occasions. And Edition: c= urrent; Page: [394] as for the judiciary rights, there were laws which pre= vented* misdemeanour= s.

CHAP. XIX.: Of Compositions among the barba= rous Nations.
SINCE it is impossible to have any toler= able notion of our political law, unless we are thoroughly acquainted with = the laws and manners of the German nations, I shall therefore pause here a = while, in order to enquire into those manners and laws.

It appears by Tacitus, that the Germans = knew only two capital crimes; they hanged traitors, and drowned cowards; th= ese were the only public crimes among those people. When a man=E2=80=A0 had injured another, th= e relations of the person injured took share in the quarrel, and the offenc= e was cancelled by a satisfaction. This satisfaction was made to the person= offended when capable of receiving it: or to the relations if they had bee= n injured in common, or if by the decease of the party injured, the satisfa= ction had devolved to them.

In the manner mentioned by Tacitus, thes= e satisfactions were made by the mutual agreement of the parties; hence in = the codes of the barbarous nations these satisfactions are called compositi= ons.

The law=E2=80=A1 of the Frisians is the only one I find that= has left the people in that situation, in which every family at variance w= as in some measure in the state of nature, and in which being unrestrained = either by a political or civil law, they might give a loose Edition: current; Page: [395] to their re= venge, till they had obtained satisfaction. Even this law was moderated; a = regulation was made that the person whose life was sought after should be u= nmolested in his own house, as also in going and coming from church, and fr= om the court where causes were tried.*

The compilers of the Salic law cite=E2=88=A5 an ancient usag= e of the Franks, by which a person who had dug a corpse out of the ground, = in order to strip it, should be banished from society, till the relations h= ad consented to his being re-admitted. And as before that time strict order= s were issued to every one, even to the offender=E2=80=99s own wife, not to= give him a morsel of bread, or to receive him under their roof; such a per= son was in respect to others, and others in respect to him, in a state of n= ature, till an end was put to this state by a composition.

This excepted, we find that the sages of= the different barbarous nations thought of determining by themselves, what= would have been too long and too dangerous to expect from the mutual agree= ment of the parties. They took care to fix the value of the composition whi= ch the party injured was to receive. All those barbarian laws are in this r= espect most admirably exact; the several cases are minutely=C2=A7 distinguished, the circumstan= ces are weighed, the law substitutes itself in the place of the person inju= red, and insists upon the same satisfaction as he himself would have demand= ed in cold blood.

By the establishing of those laws, the G= erman nations quitted that state of nature, in which they seemed to have li= ved in Tacitus=E2=80=99s time.

Rotharis declares in the law of=E2=80=A0 the Lombards, Edition: current; Page: <= span class=3D"bracket">[396] t= hat he had increased the compositions anciently accustomed for wounds, to t= he end that the wounded person being fully satisfied, all enmities should c= ease. And indeed, as the Lombards, from a very poor people, were grown rich= by the conquest of Italy, the ancient compositions were become frivolous, = and reconcilements prevented. I do not question but this was the motive, wh= ich obliged the other chiefs of the conquering nations, to make the differe= nt codes of laws now extant.

The principal composition was that which= the murderer paid to the relations of the deceased. The difference of=E2=80=A0 conditions prod= uced a difference in the compositions: Thus in the law of the Angli, there = was a composition of six hundred sous for the murder of an adeling, two hundred for that of a freeman, and thirty for kill= ing a bondman. The largeness therefore of the composition for the life of a= man, was one of his chief privileges; for besides the distinction it made = of his person, it likewise established a greater security in his favour amo= ng rude and boisterous nations.

This we are made sensible of by the law = of the=E2=80=A1 Bava= rians: it gives the names of the Bavarian families who received a double co= mposition, because they were the first=E2=88=A5 after the Agilolfings. The Agilolfings were of = the ducal race, and it was customary with this nation to choose a duke out = of that family; these had a quadruple composition. The composition for a du= ke exceeded by a third, that which had been established for the Agilolfings= : =E2=80=9CBecause he is a duke, says the law, = a greater honour is paid to him than to his relations.=E2=80=9D

Edition: current; Page: [397]
All these compositions were valued in mo= ney. But as those people, especially when they lived in Germany, had very l= ittle specie, they might pay it in cattle, corn, moveables, arms, dogs, haw= ks=C2=A7, lands, &am= p;c. The law itself*= frequently determined the value of those things; which explains how it was= possible for them to have such a number of pecuniary punishments with so v= ery little money.

These laws were therefore employed in ex= actly determinating the difference of wrongs, injuries, and crimes; to the = end that every one might know how far he had been injured or offended, the = reparation he was to receive, and especially that he was to receive no more= .

In this light it is easy to conceive, th= at a person who had taken revenge after having received satisfaction, was g= uilty of an heinous crime. This contained a public as well as a private off= ence: it was a contempt of the law of itself; a crime which the legislators= =E2=80=A0 never fail= ed to punish.

There was another crime, which above all= others was considered as dangerous, when=E2=80=A1 those people lost something of their spirit = of independence, and when the kings endeavoured to establish a better civil= administration: this was the refusing to give or to Edition: current; Page: [398] receive satisfaction= . We find in the different codes of the laws of the Barbarians, that the le= gislators were peremptory=E2=88=A5 on this article. In effect, a person who refused to receive = satisfaction, wanted to preserve his right of prosecution; he who refused t= o give it left the right of prosecution to the person injured; and this is = what the sages had reformed in the institutions of the Germans, whereby peo= ple were invited but not compelled to compositions.

I have just now made mention of a text o= f the Salic law, in which the legislator left the party offended at liberty= to receive or refuse satisfaction; it is the law=C2=A7 by which a person who had stript a dead= body, was expelled society; till the relations upon receiving satisfaction= , petitioned for his being re-admitted. It was owing to the respect they ha= d for sacred things, that the compilers of the Salic laws did not meddle wi= th the ancient usage.

It would have been absolutely unjust to = grant a composition to the relations of a robber killed in the fact, or to = the relations of a woman who had be repudiated for the crime of adultery. T= he law* of the Bavar= ians allowed no composition in the like case, but punished the relations wh= o sought revenge.

It is no rare thing to meet with composi= tions for involuntary actions in the codes of the laws of the Barbarians. T= he law of the Lombards is generally very prudent; it=E2=80=A0 ordained, that in those cases the= composition should be according to the person=E2=80=99s generosity; Edition: current; Page: [399] and = that the relations should no longer be permitted to pursue their revenge.

Clotharius the second made a very wise d= ecree: he forbade=E2=80= =A0 the person robbed to receive any clandestine composition, and witho= ut an order from the judge. We shall presently see the motive of this law.<= /p>

CHAP. XX.: Of what was afterwards called th= e Jurisdiction of the Lords.
BESIDE the composition which they were o= bliged to pay to the relations for murders or injuries, they were also unde= r a necessity of paying a certain duty, which the codes of the barbarian la= ws call=E2=80=A1 fredum. We have no term in our modern language to = express it; yet I intend to treat of it at large; and in order to give an i= dea of it, I begin with defining it a recompence for the protection granted= against the right of prosecution. Even to this day, f= red, in the Swedish language, signifies peace.

The administration of justice among thos= e rude and unpolished nations, was nothing more than granting to the person= who had committed an offence, a protection against the prosecution of the = party offended, and obliging the latter to accept of the satisfaction due t= o him: insomuch that among the Germans, contrary to the practice of all oth= er nations, justice was administered in order to protect the criminal again= st the party injured.

Edition: current; Page: [400]
The codes of the Barbarian laws have giv= en us the cases in which the freda might be dem= anded. When the relations could not prosecute, they allow of no fredum; and indeed, when there was no prosecution, there c= ould be no composition for a protection against it. Thus, in the law of the= =C2=A7 Lombards, if = a person happened to kill a freeman by chance, he paid the value of the man= killed, without the fredum; because as he had = killed him involuntarily, it was not the case in which the relations were a= llowed the right of prosecution. Thus in the law of the* Ripuarians, when a person was killed= with a piece of wood, or with any instrument made by a man, the instrument= or the wood were deemed culpable, and the relations seized upon them for t= heir own use, but were not allowed to demand the fredu= m.

In like manner, when a beast happened to= kill a man, the=E2=80= =A1 same law established a composition without the fredum, because the relations of the deceased were not offended.

In fine, it was ordained by the=E2=80=A0 Salic law, that a= child who had commited a fault before the age of twelve, should pay the co= mposition without the fredum: as he was not yet= able to bear arms, he could not be in the case in which the party injured,= or his relations, had a right to demand satisfaction.

It was the criminal that paid the fredum for the peace and security, of which he had be= en deprived by his crime, and which he might recover by protection. But a c= hild did not lose this security; he was not a man, and consequently could n= ot be expelled from human society.

This fredum = was a local right in favour of the person Edition: current; Page: [401] who was=E2=88=A5 judge of the district. Yet the law= of the Ripuarians=C2=A7= forbade him to demand it himself: it ordained, that the party who had = gained the cause should receive it and carry it to the exchequer, to the en= d that there might be a lasting peace, says the law, among the Ripuarians.<= /p>

The greatness of the fredum was proportioned to the degree of* protection: thus the fr= edum for the king=E2=80=99s protection was greater than what was gra= nted for the protection of the count, or of the other judges.

Here I see the origin of the jurisdictio= n of the lords. The fiefs comprized very large territories, as appears from= a vast number of records. I have already proved that the kings raised no t= axes on the lands belonging to the division of the Franks; much less could = they reserve to themselves any duties on the fiefs. Those who obtained them= , had in this respect a full and perfect enjoyment, reaping every possible = emolument from them. And as one of the most considerable=E2=80=A0 emoluments was the justiciar= y profits freda, which were received according = to the usage of the Franks, it followed from thence, that the person seized= of the fief, was also seized of the jurisdiction, the exercise of which co= nsisted of the compositions made to the relations, and of the profits accru= ing to the lord; it was nothing more than ordering the payment of the compo= sitions of the law, and demanding the legal fines.

Edition: current; Page: [402]
We find by the formularies containing co= nfirmation of the perpetuity of a fief in favour of a feudal lord*, or of the privileges of fie= fs in favour of=E2=80=A0= churches, that the fiefs were possessed of this right. This appears al= so from an infinite number of charters=E2=80=A1 mentioning a prohibition to the king=E2=80=99s = judges or officers of entering upon the territory in order to exercise any = act of judicature whatsoever, or to demand any judiciary emolument. When th= e king=E2=80=99s judges could no longer make any demand in a district, they= never entered it; and those to whom this district was left, performed the = same functions as had been exercised before by the judges.

The king=E2=80=99s judges are forbidden = also to oblige the parties to give security for their appearing before them= : it belonged therefore to the person who had received the territory in fie= f, to demand this security. They mention also, that the king=E2=80=99s comm= issaries shall not insist upon being accommodated with a lodging; in effect= , they no longer exercised any function in those districts.

The administration therefore of justice,= both in the old and new fiefs, was a right inherent in the very fief itsel= f, a lucrative right which constituted a part of it. For this reason it had= been considered at all times in this light; from whence this maxim arose, = that jurisdictions are patrimonial in France.

Some have thought that the jurisdictions= derived their origin from the manumissions made by the kings and lords, in= favour of their bondmen. But the German nations, and those descended from = them, are not the only people who manumitted their bondmen, Edition: current; Page: [403] and yet the= y are the only people that established patrimonial jurisdictions. Besides, = we find by the formulariesOthers have taken a shorter cut: the lor= ds, say they, and this is all they say, usurped the jurisdictions. But are = the nations descended from Germany the only people in the world that usurpe= d the rights of princes? We are sufficiently informed by history, that seve= ral other nations have encroached upon their sovereigns; and yet we find no= other instance of what we call the jurisdiction of the lords. The origin o= f it is therefore to be traced in the usages and customs of the Germans.

Whoever has the curiosity to look into L= oyseau=E2=80=A0 will= be surprised at the manner in which this author supposes the lords to have= proceeded, in order to form and usurp their different jurisdictions. They = must have been the most artful people in the world; they must have robbed a= nd plundered, not after the manner of a military nation, but as the country= justices and the attornies rob one another. Those brave warriors must be s= aid to have formed a general system of politics throughout all the province= s of the kingdom, and in so many other countries in Europe: Loyseau makes t= hem reason, as he himself reasoned in his closet.

Edition: current; Page: [404]
Once more: if the jurisdiction was not a= dependence of the fief, how come we every where=E2=80=A0 to find, that the service of the fief= was to attend the king or the lord both in their courts and in the army?

CHAP. XXI.: Of the territorial Jurisdiction= of the Churches.
THE churches acquired a very considerabl= e property. We find that our kings gave them great seignories, that is, gre= at fiefs; and we find jurisdictions established at the same time in the dem= esnes of those churches. From whence could so extraordinary a privilege der= ive its origin? It must certainly have been in the nature of the grant: the= church land had this privilege, because it had not been taken from it. A s= eignory was given to the church; and it was allowed to enjoy the same privi= leges, as if it had been granted to a vassal. It was also subjected to the = same service as it would have paid to the state if it had been given to a l= ayman, according to what we have already observed.

The churches had therefore the right of = demanding the payment of compositions in their territory; and of insisting = upon the fredum; and as those rights necessaril= y implied that of hindering the king=E2=80=99s officers from entering upon = the territory, to demand these fr=C3=A9da and t= o exercise acts of judicature, the right which ecclesiastics had of adminis= tering justice in their own territory, was called immu= nity, in the style of the formularies*, of the charters, and of the capitularies.

Edition: current; Page: [405]
The law of the Ripuarians=E2=80=A0 forbids the freedmen=E2=80=A1 of the churches= , to hold the assembly= =E2=88=A5 for administering justice in any other place than in the chur= ch where they were manumitted. The churches had therefore jurisdictions eve= n over freemen, and held their placita in the e= arliest times of the monarchy.

I find in the lives of the saints=C2=A7, that Clovis gave to= a certain holy person a power over a district of six leagues, and exempted= it from all manner of jurisdiction. This, I believe, is a falsity, but it = is a falsity of a very ancient date; both the truth and the fiction contain= ed in that life are relative to the customs and laws of those times, and it= is these customs* a= nd laws we are investigating.

Clotharius II. orders=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0 the bishops or the = nobility who are possessed of estates in distant parts, to chuse upon the v= ery spot those who are to administer justice, or to receive the judiciary e= moluments.

The same prince=E2=80=A1=E2=80=A1 regulates the judiciary po= wer between the ecclesiastic courts and his officers. The capitulary of Cha= rlemaign in the year 802 prescribes to the bishops and abbots, the qualific= ations necessary for their officers of justice. Another capitulary=E2=88=A5=E2=88=A5 of the s= ame prince inhibits the royal officers, to exercise any jurisdiction over=C2=A7=C2=A7 those who= are employed in Edition: cur= rent; Page: [406] manuring church-lands, except they entered into that sta= te by fraud, and to exempt themselves from contributing to the public charg= es. The bishops assembled at Rheims made a declaration*, that the vassals belonging to the resp= ective churches are within their immunity. The capitulary of Charlemaign in= the year 806=E2=80=A0 ordains that the churches should have both criminal and civil jurisdicti= on over those who live upon their lands. In fine, as the capitulary=E2=80=A1 of Charles the Ba= ld distinguishes between the king=E2=80=99s jurisdiction, that of the lords= , and that of the church; I shall say nothing farther=E2=88=A5 upon this subject.

CHAP. XXII.: That the Jurisdictions were es= tablished before the End of the second Race.
IT has been pretended that the vassals u= surped the jurisdiction in their seignories, during the confusion of the se= cond race. Those who chuse rather to form a general proposition than to exa= mine it, found it easier to say that the vassals did not possess, than to d= iscover how they came to possess. But the jurisdictions do not owe their or= igin to usurpations; they Edi= tion: current; Page: [407] are derived from the primitive establishment, = and not from its corruption.

=E2=80=9CHe who kills a freeman, says* the law of the Bavari= ans, shall pay a composition to his relations, if he has any; if not, he sh= all pay it to the duke, or to the person under whose protection he had put = himself in his life-time.=E2=80=9D It is well known what it was to put one= =E2=80=99s self under the protection of another for a benefice.

=E2=80=9CHe who had been robbed of his b= ondman, says the law of the Alemans=E2=80=A0, shall have recourse to the prince to whom the rob= ber is subject; to the end that he may obtain a composition.=E2=80=9D

=E2=80=9CIf a cente= narius, says=E2= =80=A1 the decree of Childebert, finds a robber in another hundred than= his own, or in the limits of our faithful vassals, and does not drive him = out, he shall be answerable for the robber, or purge himself by oath.=E2=80= =9D There was therefore a difference between the district of the centenarii= and that of the vassals.

This decree=E2=88=A5 of Childebert explains the constitution= of Clotharius in the same year, which being given for the same case and fa= ct, differs only in the terms; the constitution calling in truste, what by the decree is stiled in te= rminis fidelium nostrorum. Messieurs Bignon and Ducange=C2=A7 who pretend that in Edition: curre= nt; Page: [408] truste signified another king=E2=80=99s demesne, ar= e mistaken in their conjecture.

Pepin, king of Italy, in a constitution<= a href=3D"https://oll.libertyfund.org/title/montesquieu-complete-works-vol-= 2-the-spirit-of-laws#lf0171-02_footnote_nt_1071" id=3D"lf0171-02_footnote_n= t_1071_ref" class=3D"footnote-link type-footnote">** that had been made= as well for the Franks as for the Lombards, after imposing penalties on th= e counts and other royal officers, for prevarications or delays in the admi= nistration of justice, ordains=E2=80=A0=E2=80=A0 that if it happens that a Frank or a Lombard p= ossessed of a fief is unwilling to administer justice, the judge to whose d= istrict he belongs, shall suspend the exercise of his fief, and in the mean= time, either the judge or his commissary shall administer justice.

It appears by a capitulary* of Charlemaign, that the kings d= id not levy the freda in all places. Another=E2=80=A0 capitulary of= the same prince shews the feudal laws, and feudal court to have been alrea= dy established. Another of Lewis the Debonnaire ordains, that when a person= possessed of a fief, does not administer justice=E2=80=A1, or hinders it from being administer= ed, the king=E2=80=99s commissaries shall live upon him at discretion, till= justice be administered. I shall likewise quote two=E2=88=A5 capitularies of Charles the Bald,= one of the Edition: current;= Page: [409]<= /span> year 861; where we find the particular jurisdictions establis= hed, with judges and subordinate officers; and the other=C2=A7 of the year 864, where he makes= a distinction between his own seignories and those of private persons.

We have not the original grants of the f= iefs, because they were established by the partition, which is known to hav= e been made among the conquerors. It cannot therefore be proved by original= contracts, that the jurisdictions were at first annexed to the fiefs: but = if in the formularies of the confirmations, or of the translations of those= fiefs in perpetuity, we find, as already hath been observed, that the juri= sdiction was there established; this judiciary right must certainly have be= en inherent in the fief, and one of its chief privileges.

We have a far greater number of records,= that establish the patrimonial jurisdiction of the clergy in their distric= ts, than there are to prove that of the benefices or fiefs of the feudal lo= rds; for which two reasons may be assigned. The first, that most of the rec= ords now extant were preserved or collected by the monks, for the use of th= eir monasteries. The second, that the patrimony of the several churches hav= ing been formed by particular grants, and by a kind of exception to the ord= er established, they were obliged to have charters granted to them; whereas= the concessions made to the feudal lords being consequences of the politic= al order, they had no occasion to demand, and much less to preserve, a part= icular charter. Nay, the kings were oftentimes satisfied with making a simp= le delivery with the scepter, as appears from the life of St. Maur.

Edition: current; Page: [410]
But the third formulary* of Marculfus sufficiently proves, t= hat the privileges of immunity, and consequently that of jurisdiction, were= common to both the clergy and the laity, since it is made for both. The sa= me may be said of the constitution of Clotharius II=E2=80=A0.

CHAP. XXIII.: General Idea of the Abb=C3=A9= Du Bos=E2=80=99s Book on the Establishment of= the French Monarchy in = Gaul.
BEFORE I finish this book, it will not b= e im, proper to write a few strictures on the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=99s pe= rformance, because my notions are perpetually contrary to his; and if he ha= s hit on the truth, I must have missed it.

This performance has imposed upon a grea= t many, because it is penned with art; because the point in question is con= stantly supposed; because the more it is deficient in proofs, the more it a= bounds in probabilities; and, in fine, because an infinite number of conjec= tures are laid down as principles, and from thence other conjectures are in= ferred as consequences. The reader forgets he has been doubting, in order t= o begin to believe. And as a prodigious fund of erudition is interspersed, = not in the system, but around it, the mind is taken up with the appendages,= and neglects the principal. Besides, such a vast multitude of researches h= ardly permit one to imagine that nothing has been found; the length of the = way makes us think that we are arrived at our journey=E2=80=99s end.

But when we examine the matter thoroughl= y, we find an immense colossus with earthen feet; and it is Edition: current; Page: [411] the earthen= feet that render the colossus immense. If the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=99s s= ystem had been well grounded, he would not have been obliged to write three= tedious volumes to prove it; he would have found every thing within his su= bject; and without wandering on every side in quest of what was extremely f= oreign to it, even reason itself would have undertaken to range this in the= same chain with the other truths. Our history and laws would have told him= ; =E2=80=9CDo not take so much trouble, we shall be your vouchers.=E2=80=9D=

CHAP. XXIV.: The same Subject continued. Re= flection on the main Part of the System.
THE Abb=C3=A9 du Bos endeavours by all m= eans to explode the opinion that the Franks made the conquest of Gaul. Acco= rding to his system our kings were invited by the people, and only substitu= ted themselves in the place, and succeeded to the rights, of the Roman empe= rors.

This pretension cannot be applied to the= time when Clovis, upon his entering Gaul, took and plundered the towns; ne= ither is it applicable to the period when he defeated Syagrius the Roman co= mmander, and conquered the country which he held; it can therefore be refer= red only to the period when Clovis, already master of a great part of Gaul = by open force, was called by the choice and affection of the people to the = sovereignty over the rest. And it is not enough that Clovis was received, h= e must have been called; the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos must prove that the people ch= ose rather to live under Clovis, than under the domination of the Romans, o= r under their own laws. The Romans belonging to that part of Gaul not yet i= nvaded by the Edition: curren= t; Page: [412= ] Barbarians, were, according to this author, of two sorts; t= he first were of the Armorican confederacy, who had driven away the emperor= =E2=80=99s officers, in order to defend themselves against the Barbarians, = and to be governed by their own laws; the second were subject to the Roman = officers. Now does the Abb=C3=A9 produce any convincing proofs that the Rom= ans who were still subject to the empire, called in Clovis? Not one. Does h= e prove that the republic of the Armoricans invited Clovis; or even conclud= ed any treaty with him? Not at all. So far from being able to tell us the f= ate of this republic, he cannot even so much as prove its existence; and no= twithstanding he pretends to trace it from the time of Honorius to the conq= uest of Clovis, notwithstanding he relates with a most admirable exactness = all the events of those times; still this republic remains invisible in anc= ient authors. For there is a wide difference between proving by a passage o= f Zozymus*, that und= er the emperor Honorius, the=E2=80=A0 country of Armorica and the other provinces of Gaul revol= ted and formed a kind of republic; and shewing us that notwithstanding the = different pacifications of Gaul, the Armoricans formed a particular republi= c, which continued till the conquest of Clovis: and yet this is what he sho= uld have demonstrated by strong and substantial proofs, in order to establi= sh his system. For when we behold a conqueror entering a country, and subdu= ing a great part of it by force and open violence, and soon after we find t= he whole country subdued, without any mention in history of the manner of i= ts being effected, we have sufficient reason to believe that the affair end= ed as it began.

Edition: current; Page: [413]
When we find he has mistaken this point,= it is easy to perceive that his whole system falls to the ground; and as o= ften as he infers a consequence from these principles, that Gaul was not co= nquered by the Franks, but that the Franks were invited by the Romans, we m= ay safely deny it.

This author proves his principle, by the= Roman dignities with which Clovis was invested: he insists that Clovis suc= ceeded to Chilperic his father in the office of magist= er maliti=C3=A6. But these two offices are merely of his own creatio= n. S. Remigius=E2=80=99s letter to Clovis, on which he grounds his opinion<= a href=3D"https://oll.libertyfund.org/title/montesquieu-complete-works-vol-= 2-the-spirit-of-laws#lf0171-02_footnote_nt_1082" id=3D"lf0171-02_footnote_n= t_1082_ref" class=3D"footnote-link type-footnote">=E2=80=A1, is only a = congratulation upon his accession to the crown. When the intent of a writin= g is so well known, why should we give it another turn?

Clovis, towards the end of his reign, wa= s made consul by the emperor Anastasius: but what right could he receive fr= om an authority that lasted only one year? It is very probable, says our au= thor, that in the same diploma the emperor Anastasius made Clovis proconsul= . And, I say, it is very probable he did not. With regard to a fact for whi= ch there is no foundation, the authority of him who denies is equal to that= of him who affirms. But I have also a reason for denying it. Gregory of To= urs, who mentions the consulate, says never a word concerning the proconsul= ate. And even this proconsulate could have lasted only about six months. Cl= ovis died a year and a half after he was created consul; and we cannot pret= end to make the proconsulate an hereditary office. In fine, when the consul= ate, and, if you will, the proconsulate were conferred upon him, he was alr= eady master of the monarchy, and all his rights were established.

Edition: current; Page: [414]
The second proof alledged by the Abb=C3= =A9 du Bos, is the renunciation made by the emperor Justinian, in favour of= the children and grand-children of Clovis, of all the rights of the empire= over Gaul. I could say a great deal concerning this renunciation. We may j= udge of the regard shewn to it by the kings of the Franks, from the manner = in which they performed the conditions of it. Besides, the kings of the Fra= nks were masters, and peaceable sovereigns of Gaul; Justinian had not one f= oot of ground in that country; the western empire had been destroyed a long= time before; and the eastern empire had no right to Gaul, but as represent= ing the emperor of the west. These were rights to rights; the monarchy of t= he Franks was already founded; the regulation of their establishment was ma= de; the reciprocal rights of the persons and of the different nations who l= ived in the monarchy, were agreed on; the laws of each nation were given an= d even reduced into writing. What could therefore that foreign renunciation= avail to a government already established?

What can the Abb=C3=A9 mean by making su= ch a parade of the declamations of all those bishops, who amidst the confus= ion, and total subversion of the state, endeavour to flatter the conqueror?= What else is implied by flattering, but the weakness of him who is obliged= to flatter? What does rhetoric and poetry prove, but the use of those very= arts? Is it possible to help being surprised at Gregory of Tours, who afte= r mentioning the assassinations committed by Clovis, says, that God laid hi= s enemies every day at his feet, because he walked in his ways? Who doubts = but the clergy were glad of Clovis=E2=80=99s conversion, and that they even= reaped great advantages from it? But who doubts at the same time that the = people experienced all the miseries of conquest, and that the Roman governm= ent submitted Edition: curren= t; Page: [415= ] to that of the Franks? The Franks were neither willing nor = able to make a total change; and few conquerors were ever seized with so gr= eat a degree of madness. But to render all the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=99s c= onsequences true, they must not only have made no change amongst the Romans= , but they must have even changed themselves.

I could undertake to prove, by following= this author=E2=80=99s method, that the Greeks never conquered Persia. I sh= ould set out with mentioning the treaties which some of their cities conclu= ded with the Persians: I should mention the Greeks who were in Persian pay,= as the Franks were in the pay of the Romans. And if Alexander entered the = Persian territories, besieged, took, and destroyed the city of Tyre, it was= only a particular affair like that of Syagrius. But, behold the Jewish pon= tiff goes forth to meet him. Listen to the oracle of Jupiter Hammon. Recoll= ect how he had been predicted at Gordium. See what a number of towns crowd,= as it were, to submit to him; and how all the Satraps and grandees come to= pay him obeisance. He put on the Persian dress; this is Clovis=E2=80=99s c= onsular robe. Does not Darius offer him one half of his kingdom? Is not Dar= ius assassinated like a tyrant? Do not the mother and wife of Darius weep a= t the death of Alexander? Were Quintus Curtius, Arrian, or Plutarch, Alexan= der=E2=80=99s cotemporaries? Has not the invention of* printing affording us great lights, whic= h those authors wanted? Such is the history of the est= ablishment of the French monarchy in Gaul.

CHAP. XXV.: Of the Fr= ench Nobility.
THE Abb=C3=A9 du Bos maintains, that at = the commencement of our monarchy there was only one Edition: current; Page: [416] order of citizens amo= ng the Franks. This assertion, so injurious to the noble blood of our princ= ipal families, is equally affronting to the three great houses which succes= sively governed this realm. The origin of their grandeur would not therefor= e have been lost in the obscurity of time. History might point out the ages= when they were plebeian families; and to make Childeric, Pepin, and Hugh C= apet gentlemen, we should be obliged to trace their pedigree among the Roma= ns or Saxons, that is, among the conquered nations.

This author grounds* his opinion on the Salic law. By that l= aw, he says, it plainly appears, that there were not two different orders o= f citizens among the Franks: it allowed a composition=E2=80=A0 of two hundred sous for the murd= er of any Frank whatsoever; but among the Romans it distinguished the king= =E2=80=99s guest, for whose death it gave a composition of three hundred so= us, from the Roman proprietor to whom it granted a hundred, and from the Ro= man tributary to whom it gave only a composition of forty-five. And as the = difference of the compositions formed the principal distinction, he conclud= es that there was but one order of citizens among the Franks, and three amo= ng the Romans.

It is astonishing that his very mistake = did not set him right. And indeed, it would have been very extraordinary th= at the Roman nobility who lived under the domination of the Franks, should = have a larger composition; and been persons of much greater importance than= the most illustrious among the Franks, and their greatest generals. What p= robability is Edition: curren= t; Page: [417= ] there, that the conquering nation should have so little res= pect for themselves, and so great a regard for the conquered people? Beside= s, our outhor quotes the laws of other barbarous nations, which proves that= they had different orders of citizens. Now it would be a matter of astonis= hment that this general rule should have failed only among the Franks. Henc= e he ought to have concluded either that he did not rightly understand, or = that he misapplied, the passages of the Salic law; which is actually the ca= se.

Upon opening this law, we find that the = composition for the death of an Antrustio*, that is, of the king=E2=80=99s vassal, was fix hund= red sous: and that for the death of a Roman, who was the=E2=80=A0 king=E2=80=99s guest, was on= ly three hundred. We find there likewise that=E2=80=A1 the composition for the death of an ordi= nary Frank=E2=88=A5 = was two hundred sous; and for the death of an ordinary Roman=C2=A7, was only one hundred. For t= he death of a Roman** tributary, who was a kind of bondman or freedman, they paid a composition= of fortyfive sous: but I shall take no notice of this, no more than of the= composition for the murder of a Frank bondman or of a Frank freedman, beca= use this third order of persons is out of the question.

What does our author do? He is quite sil= ent with respect to the first order of persons among the Franks, that is th= e article relating to the Antrustios; and afterwards, upon comparing the or= dinary Frank, for whose death they paid a composition of two hundred Edition: current; Page: [418] sous= , with those whom he distinguishes under three orders among the Romans, and= for whose death they paid different compositions, he finds that there was = only one order of citizens among the Franks, and that there were three amon= g the Romans.

As the Abb=C3=A9 is of opinion that ther= e was only one order of citizens among the Franks, it would have been lucky= for him that there had been only one order also among the Burgundians, bec= ause their kingdom constituted one of the principal branches of our monarch= y. But in their codes*= we find three sorts of compositions, one for the Burgundian or Roman n= obility, the other for the Burgundians or Romans of a middling condition, a= nd the third for those of a lower rank in both nations. He has not quoted t= his law.

It is very extraordinary to see in what = manner he evades=E2=80= =A0 those passages which press him hard on all sides. If you speak to h= im of the grandees, lords, and the nobility: these, he says, are mere disti= nctions of respect, and not of order; they are things of courtesy, and not = legal privileges; or else, he says, those people belonged to the king=E2=80= =99s council; nay, they possibly might be Romans: but still there was only = one order of citizens among the Franks. On the other hand, if you speak to = him of some Franks of an inferior rank=E2=80=A1, he says, they are bondmen; and thus he interpr= ets the decree of Childebert. But I must stop here a little, to enquire far= ther into this Edition: curre= nt; Page: [419] decree. Our author has rendered it famous by availing hims= elf of it in order to prove two things; the one*, that all the compositions we meet with in the= laws of the Barbarians were only civil fines added to corporal punishments= , which intirely subverts all the antient records: the other, that all free= men were judged directly and immediately by the king=E2=80=A0, which is contradicted by an infi= nite number of passages and authorities informing us of the=E2=80=A1 judiciary order of those t= imes.

This decree, which was made in an assemb= ly=E2=88=A5 of the n= ation, says, that if the judge finds a notorious robber, he must command hi= m to be tied, in order to be carried before the king, = si Francus fucrit; but if he is a weaker person (debilior persona), he shall be hanged on the spot. According to th= e Abb=C3=A9 du Bos, Francus is a freeman, debilior persona is a bondman. I shall defer enterin= g for a moment into the signification of the word Fran= cus, and begin with examining what can be understood by these words,= a weaker person. In all languages whatsoever, = every comparison necessarily supposeth three terms, the greatest, the less = degree, and the least. If none were here meant but freemen and bondmen, the= y would have said a bondman, and not a man of less power. Therefore debil= ior persona does not signify a bondman, but a person of a superior c= ondition to a bondman. Upon this supposition, Francus<= /span> cannot mean a freeman but a powerful man; and this word is taken her= e in that acception, because among the Franks there were always men Edition: current; Page: [420] who h= ad greater power than others in the state, and it was more difficult for th= e judge or count to chastise them. This explication agrees very well with m= any capitularies*, w= here we find the cases in which the criminals were to be carried before the= king, and those in which it was otherwise.

It is mentioned in the life of Lewis the= Debonnaire=E2=80=A0= , written by Tegan, that the bishops were the principal cause of the humili= ation of that emperor, especially those who had been bondmen, and such as w= ere born among the Barbarians. Tegan thus addresses Hebo, whom this prince = had drawn from the state of servitude, and made archbishop of Rheims. =E2= =80=9CWhat recompence= =E2=80=A1 did the emperor receive from you for so many benefits? He mad= e you a freeman, but did not enoble you, because he could not give you nobi= lity after having given you your liberty.=E2=80=9D

This discourse which proves so strongly = the two orders of citizens, does not at all confound the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos. = He answers thus=E2=88=A5= : =E2=80=9CThe meaning of this passage is not, that Lewis the Debonnair= e was incapable of introducing Hebo into the order of the nobility. Hebo, a= s archbishop of Rheims, must have been of the first order, superior to that= of the nobility.=E2=80=9D I leave the reader to judge, whether this be not= the meaning of that passage; I leave him to judge whether there be any que= stion here concerning a precedency of the clergy over the nobility. =E2=80= =9CThis passage proves only,=E2=80=9D continues the same writer=C2=A7, =E2=80=9Cthat the freebo= rn subjects were qualified Ed= ition: current; Page: [421] as noblemen; in the common acceptation nobleme= n and men who are free-born have for this long time signified the same thin= g.=E2=80=9D What! because some of our Burghers have lately assumed the qual= ity of noblemen, shall a passage of the life of Lewis the Debonnaire be app= lied to this sort of people? =E2=80=9CAnd perhaps, (continues he still)=E2=88=A5 Hebo had not b= een a bondman among the Franks, but among the Saxons, or some other German = nation, where the people were divided into several orders.=E2=80=9D Then be= cause of the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos=E2=80=99s perhaps= there must have been no nobility among the nation of the Franks. But he ne= ver applied a perhaps so badly. We have seen th= at Tegan=C2=A7 disti= nguishes the bishops, who had opposed Lewis the Debonnaire, some of whom ha= d been bondmen, and others of a barbarous nation. Hebo belonged to the form= er and not to the latter. Besides, I do not see how a bondman, such as Hebo= , can be said to have been a Saxon or a German; a bondman has no family, an= d consequently no nation. Lewis the Debonnaire manumitted Hebo; and as bond= men after their manumission, embraced the law of their master, Hebo was bec= ome a Frank, and not a Saxon or German.

I have been hitherto acting offensively;= it is now time to defend myself. It will be objected to me, that indeed th= e body of the Antrustios formed a distinct order in the state, from that of= the freemen; but as the fiefs were at first precarious, and afterwards for= life, this could not form a nobleness of descent, since the privileges wer= e not annexed to an hereditary fief. This is the objection which induced Mr= . de Valos to think, that there was only one order of citizens Edition: current; Page: [422] among the= Franks; an opinion which the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos has borrowed of him, and whi= ch he has absolutely spoiled with so many bad arguments. Be that as it may,= it is not the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos that could make this objection. For after h= aving given three orders of Roman nobility, and the quality of the king=E2= =80=99s guest for the first, he could not pretend to say that this title wa= s a greater mark of a noble descent than that of Antrustio. But I must give= a direct answer. The Antrustios or trusty men were not such because they w= ere possessed of a fief, but they had a fief given them because they were A= ntrustios or trusty men. The reader may please to recollect what has been s= aid in the beginning of this book. They had not at that time, as they had a= fterwards, the same fief: but if they had not that, they had another, becau= se the fiefs were given at their birth, and because they were often granted= in the assemblies of the nation, and, in fine, because it was the interest= of the nobility to receive them, it was likewise the king=E2=80=99s intere= st to grant them. These families were distinguished by their dignity of tru= sty men, and by the privilege of being qualified to swear allegiance for a = fief. In the following book,* I shall demonstrate from the circumstances of time, that there we= re freemen who were permitted to enjoy this great privilege, and consequent= ly to enter into the order of nobility. This was not the case at the time o= f Gontram, and his nephew Childebert; but so it was at the time of Charlema= ign. But though in that prince=E2=80=99s reign the freemen were not incapab= le of possessing fiefs, yet it appears by the above-cited passage of Tegan,= that the freedmen were absolutely excluded. Will the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos,=E2=80=A0 who carries us= to Turkey, to give us an idea Edition: current; Page: [423] of the ancient French nobility; will he, I= say, pretend that they ever complained among the Turks of the elevation of= people of low birth to the honours and dignities of the state, as they com= plained under Lewis the Debonnaire and Charles the Bald? There was no compl= aint of that kind under Charlemaign. because this prince always distinguish= ed the ancient fron the new families; which Lewis the Debonnaire and Charle= s the Bald did not.

The public should not forget the obligat= ion it owes to the Abb=C3=A9 du Bos for several excellent performances. It = is by these works, and not by his history of the establishment of the Frenc= h monarchy, we ought to judge of his merit. He committed very great mistake= s, because he had more in view the count of Boulainvillier=E2=80=99s work, = than his own subject.

From all these strictures I shall draw o= nly one reflection; if so great a man was mistaken, how cautiously ought I = to tread?