---
heading: Rule 1
title: Cartesian Method
weight: 20
description: Rene Descartes 1635
image: "/covers/method.png"
writer:
  name: Rene Descartes
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ren%C3%A9_Descartes
icon: /icons/descartes.png
draft: true
---


RULES FOR THE DIRECTION OF THE MIND

RULE I.
The aim of studies should be the guidance of the mind to form solid and true judgments on all things that come before it.
It is the custom of men that, whenever they recognize any similarity between two things, they judge about both, even in what they are different, because they have discovered one of them to be true. Thus, comparing sciences, which entirely consist in the knowledge of the mind, with arts, which require some use and habit of the body, they wrongly suppose, seeing not all arts to be learned together by the same person, but that the best artist is more easily made who exercises only one, since the same hands cannot be conveniently adapted to cultivating fields and playing the lyre, or to several such diverse duties, as easily as to one of them alone: they believed the same about sciences also, and distinguishing them from each other by the diversity of objects, they thought that each should be sought separately, and all others omitted. In which indeed they were deceived. For since all sciences are nothing else but human wisdom, which always remains one and the same, however applied to different subjects, and borrows no greater distinction from them than sunlight from the variety of the things it illuminates, there is no need to confine ingenuity by any limits; for our knowledge of one truth, like the use of one art, does not separate us from the discovery of another, but rather aids it. And truly it seems strange to me that most people diligently investigate the customs of men, the powers of plants, the motions of the stars, the transmutations of metals, and the objects of similar disciplines, and yet almost never think about the good mind, or about this universal Wisdom, although all other things should be estimated not so much for their own sake as because they contribute to this. And therefore we justly propose this first rule of all, because nothing more leads us away from the straight path of seeking truth than if we do not direct our studies to this general end, but to some particular ones. I am not speaking of perverse things and condemnable ones, such as vain glory or shameful profit: for to these it is clear that it is far more convenient to open deceitful arguments and amusements adapted to the minds of the common people than solid knowledge. But I also mean honorable and praiseworthy things, because we are often deceived more subtly by these: as if we seek useful sciences for the conveniences of life, or for that pleasure which is found in the contemplation of truth, and which is almost the only complete and undisturbed happiness in this life. For we can indeed expect legitimate fruits of sciences from these; but if we think about them while studying, they often cause us to omit many things necessary for the knowledge of other things, either because they seem somewhat useless at first sight, or because they seem somewhat uninteresting. And it must be believed that they are so connected with each other that it is far easier to learn them all together than to separate one from the others. Therefore, if anyone seriously wishes to investigate the truth of things, he should not choose any particular science: for they are all connected with each other and dependent on each other; but he should only think about increasing the natural light of reason, not to solve this or that difficulty of the school, but to show the understanding to the will in each case of life what should be chosen; and he will soon marvel that he has made much greater progress than those who study particulars, and not only has obtained all the same things that others desire, but even higher ones than they can expect.